Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of Infor mation Technology 
Resources  
 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 
 
Section: Corporate Administration  Subsection: Technology  
Effective Date: June 9, 2010  Last Review Date: [Last Review]  
Approved by: 
Council Owner Division/Contact:  
Information Technology Division, 
Communications Division 
Corporate Services Department 
 
Policy Statement 
The City of Mississauga provides access to various types of Information Technology Resources 
for business purposes and expects that all Informat ion Technology Resources will be used 
appropriately and in accordance with this policy.  
 
Purpose  
The purpose of this policy is to outline the City’s  expectations with respect to the access and 
acceptable use of Information Technology (IT) Resou rces provided by the City of Mississauga 
and to ensure IT Users are aware of their responsib ilities and the limitations regarding privacy 
and confidentiality when accessing and using IT Res ources. The accompanying “Guidelines for 
Acceptable Use of IT Resources” (the Guidelines) re inforce and expand on the information 
provided in the policy.   
  
Scope 
This policy and accompanying Guidelines apply to al l City employees, elected officials, citizen 
members of committee, and volunteers acting on beha lf of the City, as well as affiliates, 
contractors, consultants and any other individuals given authorized access to, and use of, City IT 
Resources. All authorized IT Users are expected to respect the intent of this policy. 
 
IT Resources must be used in compliance with this p olicy, applicable laws and regulations, 
professional standards, software licensing agreemen ts and Corporate Policies and Procedures, 
including but not limited to the following Human Re sources, Employee Conduct policies: 
• Standard of Behaviour 
• Respectful Workplace 
• Fraud and Theft 
• Conflict of Interest 
 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        2 of 10 
 
Definitions 
For the purposes of this policy:  
 
“E-mail” includes all business and personal communi cations created using or accessing the 
City’s E-mail system, regardless of physical locati on, and includes E-mail communications sent 
or received on any City-issued or City-authorized W ireless Communication Device or smart 
phone, including, but not limited to, a BlackBerry® , iPhone™, or cell phone. E-mail includes 
communications sent or received on any personally o wned Wireless Communication Device, as 
well as to externally hosted e-mail sites, when the  communication is conducted on behalf 
of/pertains to City business. 
 
 “Internet use” includes all activities undertaken on any electronic device through the City’s 
Internet resources, including electronic mail and b rowsing and/or posting information to internal 
or external websites, whether accessed from a City facility or any offsite location. 
 
“Information Technology User” (IT User) includes al l employees, elected officials, citizen 
members of committees and volunteers acting on beha lf of the City of Mississauga, as well as all 
affiliates, contractors, consultants and any other individuals given access to, and use of, City IT 
Resources. 
 
“Information Technology (IT) Resources” means City owned or issued IT resources including, but 
not limited to: 
• Hardware, such as computer desktops, laptops, port able and computing devices and related 
peripherals (e.g. Printers, scanners, etc.) And wir eless communication devices (e.g. 
Blackberry®, pagers, iPhone™, smart phones, cell ph ones, etc.) 
• All internet and e-mail systems 
• Electronic data transmission equipment, devices an d networks 
• Business systems and servers and all city managed data and software 
• All types of telephone, radio and other audio/voic e or audio/visual communication 
equipment, devices and networks, including voicemai l 
• Local and network storage media used in the operat ion of these resources including, but not 
limited to, diskettes, CDs, tape media, paper, USB,  flash memory, flash drives, external hard 
drive, etc., and  
• Data, information and other work products, such as  computer programs, databases, 
spreadsheets, etc., created and/or maintained in us ing these resources 
In addition, any city related data and information that is accessed, stored, created, processed, 
transmitted or filed in a personal electronic devic e is included in this definition 
 
“Wireless Communication Device” means any cordless device that is capable of receiving or 
transmitting telephone communications, electronic d ata, mail, instant messaging (e.g. PIN 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        3 of 10 
 
messaging) or texting and includes, but is not limi ted to, cell phones, iPhones™, smart phones, 
pagers, and a BlackBerry®. 
 
Administration 
Access to IT Resources is provided on a corporate b asis through the Information Technology 
Division of the Corporate Services Department. 
 
The Director of Information Technology shall design ate security administrators for each corporate 
system. The security administrators will be respons ible for implementation of appropriate security 
controls. 
 
The parameters for corporate-wide, routine monitori ng are set by the Director of Information 
Technology in consultation with all City department s and approved by the Commissioner of 
Corporate Services & Chief Financial Officer (CFO) and the City Manager. Modification to these 
parameters must be conducted according to establish ed protocol, documented, and approved by 
the Commissioner of Corporate Services & CFO and au thorized, in writing, by the City Manager.  
 
Segregation of Duties 
There must be a segregation of duties between indiv iduals responsible for configuring the system 
parameters and those who are responsible for the ro utine administering of the internet monitoring 
software. Appropriate authorization must be obtaine d before system parameters are 
reconfigured. 
 
Legislative Requirements 
Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act  
The  Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of  Privacy Act  (MFIPPA) governs the 
collection, use and disclosure of information by th e City. MFIPPA applies to information both in 
hard copy and electronic form. Therefore, communica tions created, received or transmitted using 
the City’s IT Resources, including personal records , may be subject to the provisions of MFIPPA. 
Elected officials’ records are dealt with in accord ance with the Corporate Policy and Procedure - 
Records Management - Elected Officials’ Records.  
 
Communications, including E-mail, text or PIN messa ges sent or received from any IT 
Resources, including a BlackBerry®, may be subject to MFIPPA and to the same retention 
requirements as hard-copy messages and must be deal t with in accordance with the City’s 
Records Retention By-Law 537-96, as amended from ti me to time or, in the case of elected 
officials’ records, in accordance with Corporate Po licy and Procedure - Records Management - 
Elected Officials’ Records. 
 
 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        4 of 10 
 
Guidelines for Acceptable Use of It Resources 
The City’s “Guidelines for Acceptable Use of IT Res ources”, available through departmental IT 
Managers and on the City’s Intranet, and provides a ssistance to IT Users in understanding their 
respective responsibilities and the City’s standard s and expectations. The purpose of the 
Guidelines is to protect the integrity of City IT R esources and the safety and security of IT Users 
by offering additional information and examples of both acceptable and unacceptable use of IT 
Resources. 
 
Ownership and Privacy Expectations 
Ownership 
All IT Resources acquired and managed by the City a nd the data, documents, information and 
work product created, received, transmitted or down loaded from external sources using the City’s 
IT Resources are the sole property of the City of M ississauga.  
 
Privacy and Monitoring 
The City reserves the right to implement reasonable  technological and procedural measures in 
order to ensure compliance with corporate policies and standards, assess system or network 
performance and resource usage, and protect and mai ntain the security of IT Resources, as well 
as safeguard the integrity of IT Users.  
 
IT Users should have no expectation of privacy in r elation to the use of IT Resources and should 
be aware that their use of IT Resources, both busin ess and personal, may not be confidential 
and may be subject to MFIPPA. The City reserves the  right to monitor and/or access any 
electronic voice or data file and may do so for any  of the following reasons:  
• Routine monitoring of the City’s computer systems to track and analyse trends of operational 
metrics, which includes tracking of web site visits  
• Appropriate City staff, who are governed by confid entiality agreements, may be authorized 
and/or required to access the information to meet l egal obligations or if there are reasonable 
grounds to suspect that an IT User has abused or co ntravened this policy, and 
• To protect the City’s interests in the event of a reasonable suspicion of crime or 
inappropriate use of City IT Resources, and 
• If there are any other legitimate authorized reaso ns to do so, such as retrieving voice mail 
directly from an Employee’s telephone in the event of an unscheduled absence or 
unexpected departure from the City; approval from t he Director of IT is required 
 
Any resulting investigation into an IT User’s use o f IT Resources must be authorized according to 
the Investigation section of this policy. 
 
 
 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        5 of 10 
 
Confidential Information 
Employees are advised that the privacy of informati on sent electronically that is sensitive or 
confidential in nature, such as personal informatio n about individuals; employee performance or 
other human resource issues; information regarding issues to be discussed in camera, cannot be 
guaranteed. IT Users should consider another medium , such as sending the information via 
interoffice mail in an envelope marked “Confidentia l”. When sensitive or confidential messages 
are sent electronically, both the sender and the re ceiver are responsible for safeguarding the 
information. 
 
Personal communications which IT Users do not want accessed or monitored in accordance with 
this policy should not be retrieved, created, or tr ansmitted using the City’s IT resources. 
 
IT Users may forward communications in electronic f ormat to other IT Users or external 
clients/customers as required, subject to protectin g any confidential information or information 
which is otherwise protected by MFIPPA. IT Users wh o send communications in electronic format 
and do not want those communications forwarded by t he receiver(s) should expressly indicate 
this in the subject line or at the top of the e-mai l by marking the electronic communication with 
“Do Not Forward”. If an IT User receives communicat ion in electronic format which is marked “Do 
Not Forward”, it must not be forwarded unless expre ss authorization has been received from the 
sender. 
 
Responsibilities  
IT User Responsibilities 
IT Users are expected to exercise good judgement wh en using IT Resources and to ensure they 
are used appropriately. Any abuses of IT Resources must be reported to the individual’s 
immediate supervisor or the Director of IT and the departmental HR Manager.  
 
IT Users are responsible for the security of mobile  equipment assigned to them. Employees 
using a City laptop, external hard drive, USB memor y stick, digital memory card, portable device 
or Wireless Communication Device are responsible to  protect both the equipment and data, 
inside and outside of the office. Information which  is sensitive or confidential in nature should not 
be stored on mobile equipment, whether City provide d or personally owned. Where it is 
necessary, the information should be password prote cted or, when possible, encrypted. Loss or 
theft of any City issued equipment must be reported  immediately to the employee’s immediate 
supervisor, the departmental IT Manager, the Access  and Privacy Officer and Corporate 
Security.  
 
Supervisor/Manager Responsibilities 
Supervisors/managers are responsible for ensuring t hat IT Users under their supervision are 
aware of and comply with this policy; are properly authorized and trained to use IT Resources; 
that the access rights of IT Users who transfer, ta ke a leave of absence exceeding three weeks, 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        6 of 10 
 
or leave the City are processed or rescinded in a t imely manner; and that all IT Resources are 
returned to the City, if applicable.  
 
City departments, and therefore supervisors/manager s, are responsible for equipment security. 
Where practical, small, portable equipment should b e locked up at night and, depending on the 
level of risk, other methods such as restraining de vices should be used, particularly in remote 
locations. Any theft, tampering or unacceptable use  of IT Resources must be immediately 
reported to the appropriate departmental HR Manager  and/or the Director of IT. 
 
Supervisors/managers are accountable to review IT u sage reports generated by the IT Division 
and to address atypical results with IT Users, if a pplicable. 
 
IT Division Responsibilities 
The IT Division of the Corporate Services Departmen t is responsible to administer, distribute and 
track the location of required IT Resources; provid e ongoing training, guidance, technical support 
and assistance to IT Users on efficient IT practice s; and to ensure the Guidelines remain current.  
 
IT Division staff are also responsible for verifyin g that the City's IT Resources are efficient and 
appropriate for the needs of the Corporation and wi ll administer the programs used to conduct 
the on-going authorized collection and monitoring o f IT User activity, including generating IT 
usage reports. The IT Division’s monitoring and rou tine reporting of IT Users’ activities are the 
responsibility of the Director of IT. 
 
Communications Division Responsibilities 
The Communications Division of the Corporate Servic es Department is responsible for the 
overall look of the City’s Internet site and for mo nitoring the content of the site to ensure that 
standards are met. Standards for the design of corp orate web pages (page layout, colours, fonts, 
etc.) have been developed in consideration of acces sibility for all IT Users. Individual 
departments must comply with these standards.  
 
Communications will also be consulted by the Direct or of IT if consideration is being given to a 
departmental request to host a corporate web page t hrough another service provider. 
 
Access  
Access 
IT Users may not authorize their own IT Resources a ccess. Access to City IT Resources is 
determined by the requirements of the IT User’s pos ition. It is the responsibility of individual 
departments to assess IT Users needs when granting access. Form 990 - Security Access must 
be completed, authorized and signed by the employee ’s immediate manager or designate and 
forwarded to the applicable departmental IT Manager  for approval and processing. Alternately, 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        7 of 10 
 
the Director of IT may provide authorization. In th e case of elected officials, the form must be 
approved by the Commissioner of Corporate Services & CFO.  
 
Access for any authorized IT User who is not an emp loyee or elected official requires the 
approval of the Director of IT or their designate. Authorized IT Users will be required to sign an 
acknowledgement of these requirements and may also be requested to sign a confidentiality 
agreement, if applicable. 
 
Where access to an information system that is not m anaged by the department requesting 
access, supplementary authorization by the Director  of Information Technology or the applicable 
Departmental Commissioner or designate will also be  required. 
 
Exceptions 
The Director of IT may authorize access to IT syste ms to allow Information Technology staff to 
support maintenance, operations and investigations on specific systems. However, prior to any 
investigation, the Director must seek the necessary  authorizations in accordance with the 
Investigation section of this policy. 
 
In accordance with the City’s Emergency Plan, the D irector of IT may authorize Information 
Systems staff to access and update systems to deal with extraordinary circumstances. On 
cessation of the emergency, the Director shall with draw and/or update privileges immediately. 
Detailed records of all updates shall be retained f or audit purposes. 
 
Use of It Resources  
Business vs. Personal Use  
The primary purpose of IT Resources is for City bus iness communication and related activities. 
Occasional or incidental personal use of IT Resourc es is permitted within reasonable limits, 
provided it does not conflict with business use or time, impact negatively on other IT Users or on 
IT Resources, or adversely affect an individual’s p erformance of work duties and responsibilities. 
IT Users are responsible for exercising good judgem ent regarding the reasonableness of 
personal use. IT Users are reminded that personal u se may be monitored and accessed in 
accordance with this policy. 
 
Use of the City’s IT Resources to run a personal bu siness is strictly prohibited. This includes 
photocopying or printing flyers, advertisements, et c. for a personal business or for personal gain, 
or sending “for profit” messages via the Internet. Further, it is a contravention of Corporate Policy 
and Procedure, Human Resources, Employee Conduct, C onflict of Interest. 
 
No information should be distributed which would no t be distributed under the City’s letterhead or 
logo and no information should be viewed, copied or  saved which is not related to City business. 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        8 of 10 
 
Information which would not be released in hard cop y form should not be released in electronic 
form.  
 
It is the employee’s responsibility to reconcile an y outstanding overage charges such as personal 
long distance. For additional information, refer to  Corporate Policy and Procedure, Corporate 
Administration, Technology, Personal Telephone Char ges. 
 
The City cannot guarantee the security of online fi nancial transactions such as, but not limited to, 
personal online banking. IT Users must therefore be  aware that they perform these transactions 
at their own risk. Refer to the Guidelines for addi tional information. 
 
Passwords 
Passwords prevent access to equipment or confidenti al data by unauthorized persons, without 
impeding sharing of information or exchange of corp orate data among departments by authorized 
staff. IT Users must use and safeguard their indivi dual passwords at all times. 
 
General Restrictions 
IT Resources may not be used for transmitting, acce ssing, retrieving, viewing, uploading, 
downloading or storing inappropriate communications . This includes, but is not limited to, 
discriminatory, harassing, threatening, profane, ma licious, pornographic or illegal 
communications. Inadvertently accessing an inapprop riate site, or receiving an e-mail with an 
unacceptable attachment, will not be considered a v iolation of this policy. However, printing, 
saving or forwarding inappropriate material is a vi olation.  
 
IT Users must respect copyright restrictions on any  downloaded information.  
 
The files or data of other IT Users may not be acce ssed, deleted or modified without the IT 
User’s consent, or in accordance with this policy.  
 
IT Users may not install or download software on an y City issued IT Resource without the prior 
knowledge, approval and authorization of their depa rtmental IT Manager. Copying licensed 
software is strictly prohibited; only software that  is licensed with the City of Mississauga and paid 
for through the designated channels is permitted.  
 
Internet service is provided on a corporate basis t hrough the IT Division of the Corporate 
Services Department. Individual departments may not  host corporate web pages through another 
service provider without the authorization of the D irector of IT.  
 
City staff posting information on external websites  that relates to the City must not knowingly 
defame the City or post confidential information. T his includes, but is not limited to, chat groups, 
blogs, message boards, Facebook, etc.  
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        9 of 10 
 
All IT Users are prohibited from sending credit car d Primary Account Numbers (PAN) via E-mail 
or any other unencrypted electronic medium. Online purchasing with a City issued credit card 
(PCard) for City business purposes is permitted.  
 
Web Board/Potpourri 
The City’s Web Board/Potpourri allows staff to post  and exchange messages and have 
discussions with other City staff. Employees must e xercise good judgement and post only items 
that are appropriate. Staff can post referrals, non -City related events, and personal items for 
sale/buy; however, Web Board/Potpourri cannot be us ed to promote an ongoing personal 
business. For additional information regarding Web Board/Potpourri, refer to the City’s Intranet or 
the Guidelines. 
 
Wireless Communication Devices – Safe Driving Guide lines 
All IT Users who use Wireless Communication Devices  in the performance of their duties are 
expected to use Wireless Communication Devices in a  safe and responsible manner and in 
accordance with Corporate Policy and Procedure - Hu man Resources - Acceptable Use of 
Mobile Technology.  
 
Acquisition of Goods and Services Through the Inter net  
Any acquisition of goods and services for business use must comply with the City’s by-law 
governing purchasing, and established Corporate Pol icies and Procedures on Purchasing. 
 
Removal of IT User Access and Return of IT Resource s 
Upon cessation of employment for any reason; at the  end of an IT User’s relationship with the 
City; or at any time upon request, the IT User will  immediately return all IT Resources to the City. 
All information pertaining to the City stored solel y on personal IT devices, such as but not limited 
to, laptops, USB, flash memory and external hard dr ives, remains the property of the City. All 
such information not already in the City’s possessi on must be returned to the City and be 
immediately and permanently deleted from any home c omputer or personal IT device.  
 
Compliance 
Any IT User who violates this policy will be subjec t to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and 
including termination of employment. The City is au thorized to immediately withdraw IT access 
and initiate an investigation should abuse of any a spect of this policy be suspected. 
In addition, any expenses incurred as a result of n on-compliance will be the personal 
responsibility of the IT User.  
 
Investigation 
Prior to commencing an investigation into the inapp ropriate use of IT Resources by an IT User, 
Policy Number: 03-05-01 Effective Date: June 9, 201 0  
Policy Title: Access To and Acceptable Use of 
Information Technology Resources Last Review Date:        10 of 10  
 
authorization must be obtained from the Directors o f IT and Human Resources and from the 
following individuals or their designates:  
• Investigations concerning a citizen member of comm ittee, from the City Manager 
• Investigations concerning City staff, including ma nagers and supervisors, from the applicable 
Director 
• Investigations concerning a director, from the app licable commissioner  
• Investigations concerning a commissioner, from the  City Manager 
• Investigations concerning the City Manager from th e City Solicitor, and 
• Investigations concerning an elected official, fro m the City Manager as authorized by Council 
 
In addition, the appropriate commissioner must be n otified of any investigation concerning their 
departmental staff. 
 
All IT Users are required to fully cooperate in any  investigation.  
 
Revision History 
Reference  Description  
GC-0397-2010  2010 06 09  
September 25, 2013 Housekeeping – title change for 
Commissioner of Corporate Services