Computer and System Logging Policy  
1. Overview   
Computer logs are essential to the operational management of an organization.  They provide a 
primary mechanism for automated tracking and reporting for review, audit, and compliance 
functions as well as a useful mechanism for tracking changes and troubleshooting.  
2. Purpose  
Frequent monitoring and logging components are required to effectively assess information 
system controls, operations, and  general security.  This policy provides a set of logging policies 
and procedures aimed to establish baseline components across the Thiel College Network.   
3. Scope  
This policy applies to all Thiel College staff that create, deploy, or support application an d 
system software.  
4. Policy  
A. GENERAL  
Access to Thiel College’s network, systems and communications shall be logged and 
monitored to identify potential misuse of systems or information.  Logging activities 
shall include regular monitoring of system access to prevent attempts at 
unauthorized access and confirm access control systems are effective.  Log servers 
and documents shall be kept secure and only made available to personnel 
authorized by the  Director of Information Systems .  These logs shall be kept as l ong 
as necessary or required for functional use or appropriate state regulation or law.  
Thiel College’s information systems (servers, workstations, firewalls, routers, 
switches, communications equipment, etc.) shall be monitored and logged to:  
 Ensure use i s authorized  
 Manage, administer, and troubleshoot systems  
 Protect against unauthorized access  
 Verify security procedures and access  
 Verify system and operational security  
 Comply with Thiel College policies and procedures  
   Detect and prevent criminal or illegal activities  
The system administrator shall implement automated audit trails for all critical 
systems and components.  At a minimum, these logs shall be used to reconstruct the 
following events:  
 Individual user accesses to systems and sensitive infor mation  
 
 All actions taken by any individual with administrative privileges  
 Access to audit trails  
 Invalid logical access attempts and failures  
 Use of and changes to identification and authentication mechanisms —
including but not limited to creation of new a ccounts and elevation of 
privileges —and all changes, additions, or deletions to accounts with 
administrative privileges  
 Initialization, stopping, or pausing of the audit logs  
 Creation and deletion of system level objects  
B. UNDERLYING REQUIREMENTS  
All systems  that handle confidential information, accept network connections, or 
make access control (authentication and authorization) decisions shall record and 
retain audit logging information to:  
 Determine the activity that was performed  
 Who or what performed the  activity, including where or on what system the 
activity was performed (subject)  
 Systems and objects involved  
 When the activity was performed  
 Status (such as success vs. failure), outcome, and/or result of the activity  
 
Thiel College shall implement a sui table logging infrastructure and configure all 
critical devices, systems, and applications with logged audit trails.  The system 
administrator  shall ensure important events and audit trails are logged.  File integrity 
  monitoring/change detection software s hall review logs and issue alerts if the log 
data is altered.  
C. ACTIVITIES TO BE LOGGED  
Support staff shall be assigned to review and monitor the logs for systems under 
their control.  Logs shall be reviewed on a regular and on -going basis.  The frequency 
of review shall be determined according to the sensitivity of the information stored, 
the function of the system, and other system requirements as determined by the 
system administrator. Procedures should verify that logging is active and working 
properly to : 
 Ensure events are properly classified  
 Review logging for performance delays  
 Ensure compliance related logging cannot be bypassed  
 Verify access to log files is properly restricted  
 Assist with investigations  
Logs shall be created whenever the following activities are performed by a system, 
application, or user:  
 Creating, reading, updating, or deleting confidential information, including 
confidential authentication information such as passwords  
 Initiating or accepting a network connection  
 Authenticating u ser access and security authorizations  
 Granting, modifying, or revoking access rights to include new user or group 
additions, user privilege modifications, file or database object permissions, 
firewall rules, and user password changes  
 Configuring systems, networks, or services for maintenance and security 
changes including installation of software patches and updates, or other 
installed software  
 Changing statuses of application process startup, shutdown, and/or restart  
 Application process aborts, failures, or abnormal conditions due to resource 
limits or thresholds (such as for CPU, memory, network bandwidth, disk 
space, or other key system resources), failure of network services, or 
hardware faults  
   Detection of suspicious/malicious activity such as from an intrusion detection 
or prevention system, anti -virus, or anti -spyware system  
D. SYSTEM LOG ELEMENTS  
System events and activities that shall be monitored and logged are as follows:  
 System administrator and system operator activities  
 System start -ups and shut -downs  
 Logging start -ups and shut -downs  
 Backups and restorations/roll -backs  
 Exceptions and security events  
 Database commits and transactions  
 Protection software and hardware (firewalls, routers, etc.)  
 Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Preventio n Systems  
 Modifications to data characteristics including permissions, location, file type  
 Authentication successes and failures (e.g. log in, log out, failed logins)  
E. APPLICATION LOG ELEMENTS  
Third party and custom application software logging requires mor e than just relying 
on server based system logs.  Application logs help identify security incidents, 
establish baselines, provide information about problems and unusual conditions, 
assist with incident investigation, and help detect intrusions and errors.  Application 
events and activities that shall be monitored and logged include:  
 Application authentication (e.g. successes, failures, logouts)  
 Data audit trails (e.g. access to sensitive data, adding data, modifying data, 
deleting data, exporting and importing data)  
 Input validation failures (e.g. protocol violations, unacceptable encodings, 
invalid parameter names and values)  
 Output validation failures (e.g. database record mismatch, invalid data 
encoding)  
   Suspicious behavior (e.g. multiple records de leted in a short period of time, 
invalid access attempts)  
 Session management failures (e.g. cookie session identification value 
modifications)  
 Application errors and events (e.g. syntax and runtime errors, connectivity 
problems, third party service error m essages, file system errors, sequencing 
failure)  
 Higher -risk functionality (e.g. adding and deleting users, changes to access 
privileges, use of administrative privileges, access by application 
administrators, and access to sensitive data)  
 Legal compliance  services (e.g. permissions to transfer information, terms of 
use, and parental consent)  
 Security events or warnings  
F. LOGGING ELEMENTS  
Log entries can contain a number of elements based on the type and function of the 
audited system/process.  Generally, aut omated audit trails shall include the 
following information:  
 Host name, system component, or resource  
 Date/Time Stamp  
 Application ID (e.g. name and version)  
 Initiating Process ID or event origination (e.g. entry point URL, page, form)  
 Code location (e.g. m odule, subroutine)  
 User initiating action (e.g. user ID)  
 Event type  
 Result status (e.g. success, failure, defer)  
 Resource (e.g. identity or name of affected data, component)  
 Location (e.g. IP address or location)  
   Severity of event (e.g. emergency, alert, f atal error, warning, information 
only)  
 Other (e.g. parameters, debug information, system error message)  
G. FORMATTING AND STORAGE  
The system shall support the formatting and storage of audit logs to ensure integrity 
enterprise -level analysis and reporting.  M echanisms known to support these goals 
include but are not limited to the following approaches:  
 Collecting Microsoft Windows Event Logs from servers by a centralized 
logging management system  
 Storing logs in a documented format and sent via reliable network protocols 
to a centralized log management system  
 Storing log entries in a SQL database that generates audit logs in compliance 
with the requirements of this policy  
H. INFORMATION SECURITY ISSUES  
Logs are one of the primary tools used by system adminis trators and management 
to detect and investigate attempted and successful unauthorized activity and to 
troubleshoot problems.  Detailed procedures that support this policy shall be 
developed to protect against and limit log security risks such as:  
 Controls  that limit the ability of administrators and those with operating 
system command line access to disable, damage, or circumvent access 
control and audit log mechanisms  
 Protecting the contents of system logs from unauthorized access, 
modification, and/or de letion  
 Limiting outside access to logging systems to extreme or emergency 
circumstances.  Any emergency access should be authorized by the [Insert 
Appropriate Role] and use of tools bypassing security controls should be 
documented  
 Limiting changes to the a uditing policies to stop logging of an unauthorized 
activity.  Log settings should be set to track and record user policy changes  
I. ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES  
The system administrator shall be responsible for:  
   Separating duties between operations and se curity monitoring  
 Ensuring a regular review of activity audit logs, access reports, and security 
incidents  
 Approving the types of logs and reports to be generated, review activities to 
be performed, and procedures that describe the specifics of the reviews  
 Procedures that specify monitoring log -in attempts, reporting discrepancies, 
and processes used to monitor log -in attempts  
 Procedures that specify audit controls, hardware, software, and/or 
procedural mechanisms that record and examine activity in informa tion 
systems  
 Procedures ensure that the audit controls meet security requirements by 
recording and examining activity related to sensitive information  
 Securing audit trails by limiting viewing to those with a job -related need  
 Protecting audit trail files f rom unauthorized modifications  
 Ensuring audit trail files are promptly backed up to a centralized log server or 
media  
5. Audit Controls and Management  
On-demand documented procedures and evidence of practice should be in place for this 
operational policy as p art of Thiel College procedures.  Examples of auditable controls include:  
 On demand and historical log reviews of areas described in this policy  
 Documented communications surrounding logging activities  
 Incident response procedures  
6. Enforcement   
Staff or faculty members found in policy violation may be subject to disciplinary action, up to 
and including termination.  
7. Distribution  
This policy is to be distributed to all Thiel College staff , faculty  and contractors using Thiel 
College information resources.