Page 1 of 12  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Network Security Policy  
 
 
 
Author   
Kath Allen Information Governance Specialist  (ICB), 
David Green Information Governance Advisor  
(ICB),Simon Boycott Head of Governance  
 
Corporate Lead   
Chief Executive / Senior Information Risk Owner  
 
Document Version   
1.0 
 
Document Status   
FINAL  
 
Date approved by 
Corporate  Committee   
 
1st August 2023   
 
Date issued   
1st August 2023  
 
Review date   
July 202 6 

Page 2 of 12  
  
Executive Summary  
 
This document defines the computer network security policy for the Leeds General 
Practice Confederation  and this policy applies to all business functions, staff and 
information contained on the network, the physical environment and relev ant people 
who support the network.  
 
It sets out the policy for the protection of the confidentiality, integrity and availability 
of the network as well as security responsibilities for ensuring the security of our 
networks.  
 
The network for the purpose of  this policy is a collection of communication 
equipment such as servers, computers and printers which are connected together 
using our local and wide area networks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 12  
  
 
Section  Title Page  
1 Introduction  4 
2 Aims  4 
3 Scope  4 
4 Accountability and Responsibilities  5 
4.1 Provision of IT and Network Services  5 
5 Definition of Terms  6 
6 Processes to Ensure Network Security  6 
6.1 Risk Management  6 
6.2 Physical and Environmental Security  6 
6.3 Access Controls to the Network  7 
6.4 Third Party Access to the Network  7 
6.5 External Network Connections  8 
6.6 Connecting Devices to the Network  8 
6.7 Maintenance Contracts  8 
6.8 Fault Logging  8 
6.9 Network Operating Procedure  8 
6.10 Data Backup and Restoration  9 
6.11 Malicious Software  9 
6.12 Unauthorised Software  9 
6.13 Changes to the Network  9 
6.14 Security Monitoring  10 
6.15 Reporting Serious Incidents and Weakness  10 
7 Training  10 
8 Implementation and Dissemination  10 
9 Monitoring Compliance and Effectiveness of the Policy  11 
10 Advice  11 
11 Associated Documents  11 
12 Legal References and Guidance  12 
 
  
Page 4 of 12  
 NETWORK SECURITY POLICY  
 
1. INTRODUCTION  
 This Network Security Policy sets out the Leeds GP Confederation 
(Confederation) overall approach to the maintenance of the integrity, 
confidentiality and availability of its information technology infrastructure and sets 
out the responsibilities for ensuring compliance with this guidance.  
 The policy for ms part of the overall Confederation approach to information 
governance and should be read in conjunction with the organisation’s other 
information governance and security policies and procedures.  
2. AIMS  
 The aim of this policy is to ensure that all staff understand their obligations with 
regard to the network infrastructure and the acceptable use of information 
technology equipment and systems which they come into contact with in the 
course of their work. It also provides assurance to the Executive that such 
systems are maintained and used legally, securely, efficiently and effectively.  
 The Confederation will establish, implement  and maintain procedures linked to 
this policy to ensure compliance with the requirements of Data Protection Act 
1998, records management guidance, information security guidance, other 
related legislation and guidance, contractual responsibilities and to s upport the 
National Data Guardian  Standards of the Data Security and Protection  Toolkit. 
The NDG  standards are:  
  
Personal confidential data  
Staff responsibilities  
Training  
Managing data access  
Process reviews  
Responding to incidents  
Continuity planning  
Unsupported systems  
IT protection  
Accountable suppliers  
 
 Application of the policy will ensure the networks used by the Confederation:  
 • Are available when and where  required  
• Are secure at all  times  
• Retain their  integrity  
• Are protected from unauthorised or accidental  modification  
• Are designed and maintained to preserve  confidentiality  
• Protect information  assets  
3. SCOPE  
Page 5 of 12  
  This policy must be followed by all staff who work for or on behalf of the 
Confederation including those on temporary or honorary contracts, 
secondments, volunteers, pool staff, Governing Body members, students and 
any staff working on an individual contractor basis or who are employees for an 
organisation contracted to provide services to the Confederation. The  policy is 
applicable to all areas of the organisation and adherence should be included in 
all contracts for outsourced or  shared services. There are no exclusions.  
Page 6 of 12  
  
 This policy applies to:  
 All networks to which the organisation has access for:  
 • The storage and sharing and transmission of non -clinical data and  images  
• The storage and sharing and transmission of clinical data and  images  
• Printing or scanning non -clinical or clinical data and  images  
• The provision of Internet systems for receiving, sending and storing  non 
clinical or clinical data and  images  
• The provision of remote access to internal systems via secure access  routes  
 
Failure to adhere to this policy may result in disciplinary action and wh ere 
necessary referral to the appropriate regulatory bodies including the police and 
professional bodies.  
4. ACCOUNTABILITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES  
 There are a number of key Information Governance roles and bodies that the 
Confederation needs to have in place as part of its Information Governance 
Framework, these are:  
 
• Strategic Board  
• Executive  
• Corporate  Committee  
• Accountable  Officer  
• Senior Information Risk  Owner  
• Caldicott  Guardian  
• Information Asset  Owner  
• Heads of  Service  
• All employees  
 
The accountability and responsibilities are set out in more detail in the 
Information Governance Policy and Framework which must be read in 
conjunction with this policy.  
 
In addition to responsibilities outlined in the Information Governance Policy and 
Framewo rk some additional responsibilities are detailed in respect of network 
security for employees. They must ensure through their normal working 
practices that the network is protected through such safeguards as locking 
screens when not in use, logging off the  network when finished, prevent the 
introduction of Malicious Software. These safeguards are covered within the 
sections of this policy and also in the Information Handling  Policy which 
details safeguards in the workplace.  
4.1 Provision of IT and Network Services  
 IT and network services are provided by NHS Leeds CCG  on behalf of the 
Confederation. The CCG  will work within it’s policies and standard operating 
procedures  to ensure integrity, confidentiality and security of Confederation 
information  in the provision of those services.  
Therefore, some of the roles and responsibilities outlined in this policy refer to  
Page 7 of 12  
  staff roles that are part of the service provider organisation e.g. Head of 
Information Technology who will have specific responsibilities in terms of 
ensuring process and security arrangements are complied with. However, the 
overarching responsibility for  security of Confederation information affected 
by the operation of the network remains with the Confederation.  
5. DEFINITION OF TERMS  
 The words used in this policy are used in their ordinary sense and technical 
terms have been avoided.  
 The network is a collection of communication equipment such as servers, 
computers, printers, switches, hubs and routers, which have been connected 
together. The network is created to share data, software, and peripherals such 
as printers, photocopiers, Interne t connections, email connections, tape drives, 
hard disks and other data storage equipment.  
6. PROCESSES FOR ENSURING NETWORK SECURITY  
 Some of the roles and responsibilities mentioned below will be of staff who are 
employees of the CCG  who provide IT services, these include Head of 
Information Technology (IT), Chief Information Officer, Network Manager and 
Information Security Manager.  
6.1 Risk Management  
 • Risk assessments will be carried out in relation to all the business processes 
covered by this policy as part of business continuity and disaster recovery 
planning. These risk assessments will cover all aspects of the network that 
are used to support business processes. The risk assessment will identify the 
appropriate security countermeasures necessary to protect against possible 
breaches in confidentiality, integrity and  availability.  
 
• Risk assessments will be conducted by the CCG  to ensure the networks 
conforms to  ISO27001  
 
• Risk assessments will be conducted by the CCG  to determine the 
Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria (ITSEC) Assurance 
levels required for security barriers that protect the  network.  
6.2 Physical and Environmental Security  
 • Entry to secure areas housing critical or sensitive network equipment will  be 
restricted to those whose job requires it. The Head of IT will maintain and 
periodically review a list of those with unsupervised  access.  
• Network computer equipment will be housed in a controlled and  secure 
environment.  
• Critical o r sensitive network equipment will be housed in secure areas, 
protected by a secure perimeter, with appropriate security barriers and  entry 
controls.  
• The Head of IT is responsible for ensuring that door lock codes for entry  to 
Page 8 of 12  
  Network Equipment are changed periodically where there has been a 
compromise of the code, it is suspected that the code has been 
compromised, or when required to do so by the Chief Information Officer.  
• Critical or sensitive network equipment will be protec ted from power supply 
failures by the use of Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS)  devices . 
• Critical or sensitive network equipment will be protected by intruder alarms 
and fire suppression  systems.  
• Smoking, eating and drinking is forbidden in areas housing c ritical or  sensitive 
network  equipment.  
• All visitors to secure network areas must be authorised by the Head of IT  or 
the relevant Network Support Manager for that  area.  
• All visitors to secure network areas must be made aware of network  security 
requirements.  
• All visitors to secure network areas must be logged in and out. The log  will 
contain name, organisation, purpose of visit, date, and time in and  out. 
• The Head of IT or Network Support Manager will ensure that all relevant  staff 
are made aware  of procedures for visitors and that visitors are escorted, 
when  necessary.  
6.3 Access Control to the Network  
 
• Access to the network will be via a secure log -on procedure, designed to 
minimise the opportunity for unauthorised  access.  
• Where remote access to the network is implemented remote access  policy 
and home working/mobile working procedures will  apply.  
• There is a formal, documented user registration and de -registration procedure 
for access to the network. Forms for new user, changes and leaver s are 
available on the  CCG Extranet.  
• The staff member’s line manager must approve the  application.  
• Access rights to the network will be allocated on the requirements of the 
user's job, rather than on a status  basis.  
• Security privileges (i.e. 'super user' or network administrator rights) to the 
network will be allocated on the requirements of the user's job, rather than on 
a status  basis.  
• Access will not be granted until the Network Support Manager, IT  Helpdesk, 
or Head of IT registers a user.  
• All use rs to the network will have their own individual user identification  and 
password.  
• Users are responsible for ensuring their password is kept  secret.  
• User access rights will be immediately removed or reviewed for those  users 
who have left the organisation or changed  jobs.  
6.4 Third Party Access Control to the Network  
 Third party access to the network will be based on a formal contract that includes 
a standard clause which satisfies all necessary NHS confidentiality and security 
conditions and completion of A New User Form must also be completed and all  
third party access to the network must be logged.  
Page 9 of 12  
 6.5 External Network Connections  
 
• All connections to external networks and systems must have documented  and 
approved system security policies and  procedures.  
• All connections to external networks and systems must conform to the NHS - 
wide Network Security Policy, Code of Connection and supporting  guidance  
• All external connections must be approved by  the Information  Security 
Manager.  
6.6 Connecting devices to the Confederation Network  
 
• All devices connected to the Confederation network are governed by 
the NHS Statement of  Compliance.  
• The connection of any equipment to the Confederation network requires  
authorisation from the IT service  provider.  
• All electronic processing devices connecting to the Confederation 
network must be protected by up to date anti -virus software. Where the 
device does not update automatically, it is the responsibi lity of the user to 
ensure that the anti -virus software is up to  date.  
• Personally owned devices should only be directly connected to the Network 
with appropriate authorisation from the IT service provider. ‘Personally 
owned’ refers to devices that are not provided by the Confederation or 
other NHS organisation and directly connected means either by network 
cable or corporate Wi -Fi. However, a guest Wi -Fi facility can be  used.  
• The Confederation has the facility to allow non -NHS provided devices to 
connect to  the internet via a ‘guest’ wireless connection. This will be via 
password that is changed  regularly.  
• External visitors may connect to the internet via the publicly available ‘NHS Wifi’ 
SSID . 
6.7 Maintenance Contracts  
 The Network Support Manager/Head of IT will ensure that maintenance contracts 
are maintained and periodically reviewed for all network equipment. All contract 
details will constitute part of the Asset Register.  
6.8 Fault Logging  
 The Head of IT and Help Desk Manager are responsible for ensuring that a log  of 
all faults on the network is maintained and reviewed. A written procedure to 
report faults and review countermeasures will be  produced.  
6.9 Network operating procedures  
 Documented operating procedures should be prepared for the operation of the 
network, to ensure its correct, secure operation. Changes to operating 
procedures must be authorised by the Head of IT.  
Page 10 of 12  
 6.10 Data Backup and Restoration  
 
• The Network Support Manager and their team are responsible for ensuring 
that backup copies of network configuration data are taken  regularly.  
• Documented procedures for the backup process and storage of backup tapes 
will be produced and communicated to all relevant technical  staff.  
• All backup tapes will be stored securely and a copy will be stored  off-site. 
• Documented procedures for the safe and secure disposal of backup  media 
will be produced and communicated to all relevant  staff.  
• Users are responsible for ensuring that they back up their own work -related 
data to the network server i.e. not storing data on a local hard  drive.  
6.11 Malicious Software  
 Measures are in place to detect and protect the network from viruses and other 
malicious software – viruses, spyware, Trojan horses, worms etc.  
6.12 Unauthorised Software  
 Required use of any non -standard software equipment processing Confederation 
information must be notified to the Head of IT before installation. All software 
used on NHS equipment must have a valid licence agreement. It is the 
responsibility of the “owner” or responsible user of non -standard software to 
ensure that this is the case  
 Software is no longer centrally funded from a National Programme. Any new 
additional PCs added to the network must have a licence for the appropriate 
software i.e. Operating System, SQL Client, Exchange Client, Anti -Virus, 
Microsoft Office etc.  
6.13 Changes to the Network  
 • Any proposed changes to the network will be reviewed and approved by the 
Head of IT and passed where appropriate to the Chief Technology Officer. 
The Network Support Managers are responsible for updating all relevant 
design documentation, security operating procedures and network  operating 
procedures.  
• The Head of IT or the Chief Technology Officer may req uire checks on, or an 
assessment of the actual implementation based on the proposed  changes.  
• The Head of IT is responsible for ensuring that selected hardware or  software 
meets agreed security  standards.  
• As part of acceptance testing of all new network systems, the Head of IT will 
attempt to cause a security failure and document other criteria against  which 
tests will be undertaken prior to formal  acceptance.  
• Testing facilities will be used for all new network systems. Development  and 
operational facilities will be  separated.  
Page 11 of 12  
 6.14 Security Monitoring  
 The Head of IT will ensure that the network is monitored for potential security 
breaches. All monitoring will comply with current legislation.  
6.15 Reporting Security Incidents and Weaknesses  
 A major incident would constitute a loss of function of a system or breach of 
confidential information for one or more individuals or a breach of information 
which is likely to lead to harm to an individual, therefore:  
 
• All potential security breaches must be reported in accordance with  the 
requirements of the Incident Reporting Policies and the SIRO must be 
informed about serious  incidents.  
 
• Investigations will be undertaken by the appropriate Information Tec hnology 
Officers or someone nominated by  them.  
 
• Incidents will be reviewed in line with the Incident Reporting  Policies  
 
• Any information governance related incident, especially related to a breach of 
the Data Protection Act such as one that has the potential to be classed as a 
Serious Incident Requiring Investigation (SIRI) will need to be logged on the 
Incident Reporting Module on the Information Governance Toolkit to grade  the 
incident. The Confederation Information Toolkit Administrator will have access 
to the module and can grant access to appropriate staff. Examples of SIRIs 
are when there is a loss of personal data involving many individuals or where 
particularly sensitive personal information is lost or sent to the wrong address. 
Staff must rea d the Incident Reporting Policy for general reporting of incidents 
and the process for  SIRIs.  
7. TRAINING  
 Information governance and security will be a part of induction training and is 
mandatory for all staff. The Confederation will identify the information governance 
training needs of key staff groups taking into account their role, responsibility and 
accoun tability levels and will review this regularly through the Training Needs 
Assessment  process.  
8. IMPLEMENTATION AND DISSEMINATION  
 
Following ratification by the Quality, Performance and Finance  Committee 
this policy will be disseminated to staff via the Confederation’s website and 
communication through in -house staff briefings.  
 
This Policy will be reviewed every two years or in line with changes to relevant 
legislation or national guidance.  
Page 12 of 12  
 9. MONITORING COMPLIANCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF THE POLICY  
 An assessment of compliance with requirements, within the Data Security and 
Protection Toolkit  (DSP), will be undertaken each year. This includes information 
and network Security, confidentiality and data protection. Incidents are reported 
and all serious information governance issues must be reported by the SIRO at 
Executive  level and in Annual Reports . 
 
Any suspicion of fraud or bribery should be reported at the earliest available 
opportunity by contacting the Confederation Counter Fraud Specialist at the 
following link: Counter fraud  
10. ADVICE  
 Advice and guidance on any matters stemming from the Policy can be obtained 
by contacting:  
 
yhcs.infogov@nhs.net  
11. ASSOCIATED DOCUMENTS( Policies, protocols and procedures ) 
 The Confederation will produce appropriate procedures and 
guidance in conjunction This will include an Information 
Governance Handbook which will be updated annually and which 
will be given to all staff.  
 This policy should be read in conjunction with:  
 
• Confidentiality code of Practice  
• Data Protection  Policy  
• Records Management Policy  
• Freedom of Information Procedure  
• Information Governance Policy and  Framework  
• Information Handling  Policy  
• Risk Management  Policy  
• Incident Reporting  Policy  
 
And their associated procedures (including but not limited to)  
 
• Individual Rights and SAR Procedure  
• Privacy Impact Assessment Policy and Procedure  
• Anti-Fraud  Policy  
• Anti-Bribery  Policy  
• Freedom to Speak Up  Policy  
• Internet Social Media Policy  
 
Page 13 of 12  
  
12. LEGAL REFERENCES AND GUIDANCE  
 • NHS Act  2006  
• Data Protection Act  1998  
• Human Rights Act  1998  
• Computer Misuse Act  1990  
• Caldicott Guidance as updated  2013  
• Common Law Duty of  Confidentiality  
• Access to Health Records Act 1990 (where not superseded by the  Data 
Protection Act  1998)  
• Health and Social Care Act  2012  
• Crime and Disorder Act  1998  
• The Children Act 1989 and 2004 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 
(as amended by the Copyright (Computer Programs) Regulations  1992  
• Electronic Communications Act  2000  
• Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 (& Lawful Business Practice 
Regulations  2000)  
• Public Interest Disclosure Act  1998  
• Audit & Internal Control Act  1987  
• Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989 & Terrorism  Act 
2000  
• Road Traffic Act  1988  
• Regulations under Health and Safety at Work Act  1974  
• Public Records Act  1958  
• Freedom of Information Act  2000  
• Environmental Information Regulations  2004  
• Protection of Freedoms Act  2012  
• Coroners and Justice Act  2009  
• Fraud Act  2006  
• Bribery Act  2010  
• Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act  2013  
• Equality Act  2010  
• NHS Information Security Management Code of Practice  2007  
• ISO/IEC 27001:2005 Specification for an Information  Security 
Management  system  
• Health and Social Care Information Centre  Guidance  
• Professional Codes of Conduct and  Guidance  
• Information Commissioner’s Guidance  Documents