VENDOR MANAGEMENT  POLICY  
 
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 1 of 7 
 
 
1. Introduction  
Attorneys’ Title Guaranty Fund, Inc. and its employees and subsidiaries (“ ATG®”) rely on vendors to perform a range of services 
and provide products for ATG and ATG members. Insurance industry regulations and business best  practices require that we 
perform a risk assessment on our vendors and perform additional due diligence commensurate with the identified risk. Building  
and sustaining effective, positive vendor rela tionships directly correlates with how we are able to serve our members and 
Insureds , make the most of limited resources, minimize risk, keep a true regulatory course, enhance our standing in our 
community, and protect the information and assets in our car e. 
2. Purpose  
The purpose of this policy is to provide a framework for managing the lifecycle of vendor relationships and provide context f or 
ATG procedures that outline specific systems and guidelines for vendor management.  
3. Scope  
This policy applies to  all ATG business entities including  individuals, departments, and/ or subsidiaries that engage vendors as 
defined in this document.  
4. Definitions  
The following definitions are provided for the purposes of this policy:  
Vendor  
A company or individual that p rovides a product or performs a service for ATG and also meets any of the following criteria:  
- performs services at ATG facilities ( safety , insurance, or data security risk) ; 
Examples : consultants who perform work onsite, auditors, equipment repair companies, gardeners, and deliveries 
past the reception desk ( Deliveries to the reception desk are excluded .) 
- has access to member or other sensitive data ( data security risk) ; or 
Examples : some consultants, banking service providers, some software mainten ance vendors, auditors, and s canning 
and shredding companies  
- has a contractual commitment to ATG ( financial or member service risk ) 
Examples: contracted maintenance services, major software vendors, and contracted supply companies  
Vendor Risk Rating  
A Low, Medium , or High  rating assigned as a result of the “ Vendor Risk Assessment ” that indicates the relative risk a vendor 
represents to ATG.  
5. Policy  
It is the policy of ATG to effectively manage the lifecycle of all vendor relationships in order to respons ibly steward resources 
and minimize the inherent risk associated with engaging third parties to perform services . 
Vendor Management , as addressed by this policy consists of:  
- Vendor Risk Assessment ; 
- Vendor Due Diligence ; 
- Contract Management ; and  
- Vendor Supe rvision . 
Appendix A - Implementation Guidelines  provide best practices for effectively implementing the Vendor Management Policy . 
5.1. Vendor Risk Assessment  
An initial risk analysis should be conducted for each potential vendor beginning with the Risk Exposure Questionnaire 
located in Appendix A and then utilize those responses to complete the Risk Rating Matrix. The Vendor Risk Rating Matrix 
will be used to a ssign a Vendor Risk Rating of Low, Medium, or High  risk. A vendor is assigned a risk rating based on the 
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 2 of 7 
 
 highest risk level attributable to the contract, or sum of all contracts, with that vendor. Exceptions to the assigned risk r ating 
may be granted as no ted by the Risk Rating Matrix.  
The Rating is an indicator of the level of due diligence ATG requires for each vendor.  
- Low risk vendors typically require little or no further analysis or due diligence.  
- Medium risk vendors should be evaluated to determine th e appropriate level of due diligence required.  
- High risk vendors require annual due diligence review.  
VENDOR RISK RATING MATRIX  
Criteria  Low Medium  High  Exceptions Granted By  
Business Impact  Nominal business 
impact  Significant but non-
critical business 
impact  Mission critical impact  President or  
Senior Vice President  
Member Contact  None  Indirect  Direct  Senior Vice President  
Total Contract 
Amount (including all 
years of contract)  Less than $10,000  $10,000 to $50,000  Greater than $50,000  Senior Vice President  
Contract term  One year or less  One to three years  Greater than three 
years  Senior Vice President  
Access to Non -
Public Personal 
Information  No access (except 
unintentional)  Limited access on 
need-to -know basis  Access allowed and 
expected  Senior Vice President –  
Information Services or 
Privacy Officer  
Safety of ATG 
Employees, Guests, 
and Vendors 
(potential for injury 
or illness  No potential  Low potential  High potential and 
severity  Vice President –  Human 
Resources or  
Senior Vice President –  
Operations  
5.1.1.  Risk Reassessment  
Risk assessments should be reviewed annually as part of contract renewal and anytime the relationship with the 
vendor changes in any significant way.  
5.1.2.  Department Vendor List  
Each department will retain a complete vendor list, including low risk vendors, with the risk rating noted for each 
vendor. This list shall be available for the Senior Vice President –  Operations to include in the annual report to the 
Board of Directors.  
5.1.3. Vendor Due Diligence  
Due diligence requires a reasonable inquiry into a vendor’s ability to meet the requirements for the proposed service. 
The degree of due diligence required in selecting a vendor will depend on the results of the initial Vendor Ri sk 
Assessment. Due diligence for a low risk vendor may be nominal, while high risk vendors require more thorough 
due diligence. All due diligence records performed in establishing the vendor relationship, including the Risk 
Rating, should be kept by the Se nior Vice President –  Operations.  
5.2. Contract Management  
While acknowledging that even the most comprehensive agreement cannot replace the effectiveness of a relationship built on 
trust, a clearly drafted and equitable contract will protect ATG and provide a structure for expectations and issue resolution. The level of detail and relative importance of contract provisions varies with the scope and risks of the services and products 
provided.  
5.2.1.  Contract Negotiation 
Vendor negotiations should be delegated only to qualified staff with proven skills appropriate to the level of risk 
represented by the vendor relationship.  
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 3 of 7 
 
 Medium or High risk, complex, or unusual contracts should be considered for review by the following designees, as 
appropriate to th e scope and type of contract:  
- Legal Counsel  
- Senior Vice President –  Operations  
- Senior Vice President –  Information Services (required for all contract negotiations related to software hardware 
and Information Systems)  
- Vice President –  Human Resources  
5.2.2 . Contract Language  
Contract language should be reviewed to ensure that the agreement or contract meets regulatory requirements and 
does not expose ATG to unnecessary risk.  
5.2.3.  Contract Approval and Renewal  
Senior Vice Presidents are responsible for the contracts executed by their staff. Medium and High Risk vendor 
contracts, including renewals, are to be executed by a Senior Vice President.  
5.2.4.  Contract Cancellation 
Cancellation of a contract must follow agreed upon cont ract language and be executed at the same or higher level of 
the organization as the original contract execution.  
5.2.5.  Contract File Retention  
Vendor contract files will be stored for ten years after contract expiration or termination.  
5.3. Vendor Supervision  
Each vendor will be assi gned a Vendor Relationship Manager who will complete the vendor risk analysis  and vendor due 
diligence review, maintain vendor files, and act as vendor liaison.  
The Senior Vice President –  Operations, as part of the Security Program Report, will provide an  annual status report of 
Medium and High risk vendors to the Board of Directors.  
6. Responsibility  
6.1. Senior Management is responsible for implementing, maintaining, and enforcing this policy.  
6.2. The Senior Vice President of Operations is responsible f or: 
- approving Medium and High Risk vendor contracts ; 
- appointing Vendor Relationship Managers for all department vendors ; and  
- ensuring Vendor Relationship Managers comply with this policy . 
6.3. Vendor Relationship Managers are responsible for:  
- completing a Vendor Risk Assessment ; 
- completing a Vendor due diligence review ; 
- maintaining vendor files ; and  
- effectively acting as vendor liaison.  
   
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 4 of 7 
 
 APPENDIX A  
IMPLEMENTATION GUIDELINES  
The following guidelines provide an effective method for implementing the Vendor Management Policy and are employed as directed 
by the Senior Vice President of Operations.  
1. Completing a Vendor Risk Assessment  
- Review the substantive risk exposure to ATG if the product or service fails or is inadequately performed.  
Risk Exposure Category  Considerations  
Regulatory  Can the vendor create regulatory risk for ATG? 
Reputational  Can the vendor impact ATG’s reputation?  
Financial  Can the vendor impact ATG or its members financially?  
Does ATG or the vendor have insurance that will allow ATG to transfer some of the risk?  
Sensitive Data Access  To what extent will the vendor have access to sensitive ATG data?  
Operational Effectiveness  How would the vendor’s failure impact ATG’s business needs and strategic objectives?  
Could ATG perform the critical functions provided by the vendor if the vendor failed to 
perform?  
Are there other potential vendors that could readily assume service should the current 
provider fail?  
Can ATG provide adequate oversight of the vendor’s function? 
Can the vendor create risk to ATG’s processes, people, or systems?  
Would ATG be considered the “Controlling Employer” for this vendor?  
Would ATG be placed in a position of “Joint Employer’s Liability” for this vendor?  
(The terms “Controlling Employer” and “Joint Employer ’s Liability” usually apply to staff employed by 
an outside company, such as a staffing agency, but whose workplace activities are directed by ATG. 
Direct questions regarding these designations to the Vice President – Human Resources.)  
- Assign a Vendor Ris k Rating using the Vendor Risk Rating Matrix in the Vendor Management Policy, section 5.1.  
2. Completing a Due Diligence Analysis  
2.1. Review the following, as appropriate, based upon the Vendor Risk Rating and the type of risk exposure created by 
this vendor relationship:  
- SAS-70s or audit reports ; 
- industry expertise ; 
- return on investment;  
- background check, including client references and independent sources ; 
- staffing experience and expertise;  
- internal controls ; 
- financial condition and annual reports ; 
- insurance coverage ; 
- privacy policy review ; and  
- on-site visits . 
2.2. Record and retain the analysis with the Relationship Manager Records.  
3. Managing the Contract  
3.1. Vendor relationship documentation varies with the scope and risks of the services and products provided. The process 
includes:  
- negotiating the contract;  
- reviewing the contract language;  
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 5 of 7 
 
 - approving and renewing the contract;  
- canceling the contract; and  
- retaining contract files.  
3.2. Negotiating Contracts  
This process is completed by qualified  staff with proven skills appropriate to the level of risk represented by the vendor 
relationship.  
3.2.1.  Review each contract from four perspectives:  
Perspective  Consideration  
Legal  Are ATG’s interests adequately protected if a problem arises with this vendor?  
Financial  Does the agreement reasonably assure that ATG’s investment in this relationship will deliver 
the desired benefits without exposing ATG to unacceptable financial risks?  
Operational  Are the terms of the agreement operationally feasible for ATG, including:  
- Timing considerations  
- Service levels  
- ATG performance commitments  
- Technology compatibility  
- Human safety  
Risk Management  Are the terms of the agreement acceptable in light of regulatory, financial, operational, and 
reputational risks?  
3.2.2.  Complete the levels of review as directed in Section 5.1 of the Vendor Management Policy.  
3.2.3.  Maintain multiple vendor candidates for as long as possible to enter the negotiation stage with important leverage. 
The possibility that ATG could selec t an alternate vendor may prove invaluable to obtaining the vendor’s agreement 
to important contract provisions.  
3.2.4.  Record negotiations and contact between a potential vendor and the ATG using the Microsoft Word’s Track 
Changes, or other tools.  
3.2.5.  Retain the negotiation records in the Vendor Relationship Manager’s files for the life of the contract  
3.3. Evaluating Contract Language  
3.3.1.  Verify that the language in the agreement or contract meets regulatory requirements and does not expose ATG to 
unnecessary risk.  
3.3.2.  Verify that the essential components of the agreement include:  
- performance standards, expectations, and responsibilities ; 
- fees and payment terms ; 
- term length;  
- termination provisions ; and  
- insurance Requirements . 
3.3.3.  Evaluate the a greement for what it does not state, as well as for what it does state.  
3.3.4.  Verify that the vendor’s standard agreement includes all the necessary clauses.  
3.3.5.  Consider the appropriateness of the following clauses:  
- definitions;  
- scope of work;  
- process  for changing scope of work;  
- installation and training requirements;  
- ownership of any work product or intellectual property;  
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 6 of 7 
 
 - acknowledgement that the vendor is subject to regulatory review;  
- privacy and information security;  
- confidentiality agreement;  
- limitations of liability;  
- indemnity;  
- warranties;  
- dispute resolution provisions;  
- choice of law;  
- choice of venue;  
- service level agreement, including;  
- acceptable range of service quality and applicable timeframes;  
- definition of what is being measured;  
- formula for calculating the measurement;  
- mechanism for ongoing monitoring, and supervision;  
- type and timing of reporting on the status of performance; and 
- penalties or credits for meeting, exceeding, or failing to meet targets;  
3.4. Approving Contracts  
3.4.1.  Execute the contract with the appropriate level of approval as outlined in section 5.2.3 of the Vendor Management 
Policy.  
3.4.2.  When a contract is due for renewal, complete the following:  
3.4.2.1.  Review and update the Vendor Risk Rating.  
3.4.2.2.  Review and upda te the Vendor Due Diligence Report.  
3.4.2.3.  Review contract terms.  
3.5. Canceling Contracts  
When canceling a contract:  
3.5.1.  Follow agreed upon contract language.  
3.5.2.  Execute at the same or higher level of the organization as the original contract execution.  
3.6. Retaining Contract Files  
Complete the following based upon file type:  
File Type  Action  
Department Vendor List  Maintain a complete list of department vendors with the risk rating noted for each vendor . 
Original Vendor Contract File  Retain the originals of all contracts, agreements, and other essential documentation of the 
vendor relationship in the centralized file location for ten years after contract expiration.  
Working Vendor Contract File  Retain copies of all contracts, agreements, and other essential documentation in the 
Vendor Relationship Manager’s working files along with the negotiation records.  
4. Supervising Vendors  
The Vendor Relationship Manager completes the following:  
4.1. Assigns Vendor Risk Rating using the Vendor Risk Rating Matrix . 
4.2. Completes Vendor Due Diligence Analysis, as appropriate for the risk rating.  
4.3. Completes periodic due diligence review (at least annually for High risk vendors) . 
 
ATG FORM 7050  
© ATG ( 3/16)   
Page 7 of 7 
 
 4.4. Coordinates and documents ongoing vendor communication.  
4.5. Maint ains vendor files.  
4.6. Compiles and maintains vendor information, including:  
4.6.1.  vendor name and contact information;  
4.6.2.  service or product provided;  
4.6.3.  risk rating;  
4.6.4.  contract expiration;  
4.6.5.  renewal dates and terms;  
4.6.6.  regulatory requirements;  
4.6.7.  insurance requirements;  
4.6.8.  required vendor reports;  
4.6.9.  dates of last review and next review;  
4.6.10.  triggers for annual and interim reviews ; 
4.6.11.  contract amount; and  
4.6.12.  number of licenses, if applicable.  
4.7. Monitors  vendor compliance to contract terms.  
4.8. Coordinates contract renewal with appropriate contract approver.  
4.9. Coordinates contract cancellation.  
5. Responsibility  
5.1. Each Vice President is responsible for implementing these guidelines as appropriate to the department.  
5.2. The Vendor Relationship Manager is responsible for following the implementation guidelines as directed by the department 
Senior Vice President.