Acceptable Use Policy 
1.0 Overview 
The intention for publishing an Acceptable Use Policy is not to impose restrictions that are 
contrary to <Agency Name> established culture of openness, trust, and integrity. <Agency’s Security 
Team> is committed to protecting <Agency Name>’s employees, partners and the company from 
illegal or damaging actions by individuals, either knowingly or unknowingly. Internet/Intranet/Extranet­
related systems, including but not limited to computer equipment, software, operating systems, storage 
media, network accounts providing electronic mail, WWW browsing, File Transfer Protocol, and 
National Crime Information Center access are the property of the <Agency Name>. These systems 
are to be used for business purposes in serving the interests of the agency in the course of normal 
operations. Effective security is a team effort involving the participation and support of every <Agency 
Name> employee and affiliate who deals with information and/or information systems. It is the 
responsibility of every computer user to know these guidelines and to conduct their activities 
accordingly. 
2.0  Purpose 
The purpose of this policy is to outline the acceptable use of computer equipment at <Agency 
Name>. These rules are in place to protect the employee and <Agency Name>. Inappropriate use 
exposes <Agency Name> to risk including virus attacks, compromises of the network systems and 
services, and legal issues. 
3.0  Scope 
This policy applies to employees, contractors, consultants, temporary staff, and other workers 
at <Agency Name>, including all personnel affiliated with NCIC and third parties. This policy applies 
to all equipment that is owned or leased by <Agency Name>. 
4.0  Policy 
4.1  General Use and Ownership 
1.  While <Agency Name’s> network administration desires to provide a reasonable level of 
privacy, users should be aware that the data they create on the corporate systems remains 
the property of the <Agency Name>. Because of the need to protect <Agency Name’s> 
network, management cannot guarantee the confidentiality of information stored on any 
network devise belonging to <Agency Name>. 
1  
  2.  Employees are responsible for exercising good judgment regarding the reasonableness of 
personal use. Individual departments are responsible for creating guidelines concerning 
personal use of Internet/Intranet/Extranet systems. In the absence of such policies, 
employees should consult their supervisor or management. 
3.  <Agency Name> security department recommends that any information that a user 
considers sensitive or vulnerable (etc. residual NCIC information on a computer terminal 
that has access to the internet and CJIS information) be encrypted. For guidance on 
information classification, see <Agency Name> Information Classification Policy. 
4.  For security and network maintenance purposes, authorized individuals within <Agency 
Name> may monitor equipment, systems and network traffic at any time, per <Agency 
Name> Audit Policy>. 
5.  <Agency Name> reserves the right to audit the network and systems on a periodic basis to 
ensure compliance with this policy. 
4.2  Security and Proprietary Information 
1.  The user interface for information contained on Internet/Intranet/Extranet-related systems 
should be classified as either confidential or non-confidential, as defined by agency 
confidentiality guidelines. Examples of confidential information include, but are not limited 
to: NCIC information, state criminal history information, agency personnel data, etc. 
Employees should take all necessary steps to prevent unauthorized access to this 
information. 
2.  Keep passwords secure and do not share accounts. Authorized users are responsible for 
the security of their passwords and accounts. Please review <Agency Name's> Password 
Policy for guidance. 
3.  All personal computers, laptops, and workstations should be secured with password-
protected screen savers with an automatic activation feature, set at ten minutes or less, or 
by logging off (control-alt-delete) when the computer is unattended. 
4.  Because information contained on portable computers is especially vulnerable, special care 
should be exercised. Protect laptops in accordance with "Laptop Security Policy". 
5.  All devices used by employees that are connected to the <Agency Name> 
Internet/Intranet/Extranet, whether owned by the employee or <Agency Name>, shall be 
continually executing approved virus-scanning software with a current database. 
2  
6. Employees must use extreme caution when opening e-mail attachments received from 
unknown senders, which may contain viruses, e-mail bombs, or Trojan horse code. 
4.3  Unacceptable Use 
The following activities are, in general, prohibited. Under no circumstances is an employee of 
<Agency Name> authorized to engage in any activity that is illegal under local, state, federal, or 
international law utilizing <Agency Name> owned resources. The list below are by no means 
exhaustive, but attempts to provide a frame work for activities which fall into the category of 
unacceptable use. 
4.4  System and Network Activities 
The following activities are strictly prohibited, with no exceptions: 
1.  Unauthorized access, coping, or dissemination of classified or sensitive information (e.g., 
NCIC information, state criminal information, etc.). 
2.  Installation of any copyrighted software for which <Agency Name> or end user does not 
have an active license is strictly prohibited. 
3.  Installation of any software without preapproval and virus scan is strictly prohibited. 
4.  Introduction of malicious programs into the network or server (e.g., viruses, worms, Trojan 
horses, logic bombs, etc.). 
5.  Revealing your account password to others or allowing use of your account by others. 
6.  Effecting security breaches or disruptions of network communication. Security breaches 
include, but are not limited to, accessing data of which the employee is not an intended 
recipient or logging into a server that the employee is not expressly authorized to access, 
unless these duties are within the scope of regular duties. For the purpose of this policy, 
“disruption” includes, but is not limited to, network sniffing, pinged floods, packet spoofing, 
denial of service, and forged routing information for malicious purposes. 
7.  Port scanning or security scanning is expressly prohibited unless prior notification has been 
given to <Agency Name> Security administration. 
8.  Executing any form of network monitoring which will intercept data not intended for the 
employee’s host, unless this activity is a part of the employee’s normal job/duty. 
9.  Circumventing user authentication or security of any host, network, or account. 
3  
10. Interfering with or denying service to any user other than the employee’s host. 
11. Using any program/script/command or sending messages of any kind, with the intent to 
interfere with or disable a user’s terminal session, via any means, locally or via the 
Internet/Intranet/Extranet. 
15. Providing information about NCIC or list of <Agency Name> employees to parties outside 
<Agency Name>. 
5.0 Enforcement 
Violations of this policy include, but are not limited to: accessing data to which the individual 
has no legitimate right; enabling unauthorized individuals to access data; disclosing data in a way that 
violates applicable policy, procedures, or relevant regulations or law; inappropriately modifying or 
destroying data; inadequately protecting restricted data. Any violation of this policy may result in 
network removal, access revocation, corrective or disciplinary action, civil or criminal prosecution, and 
termination of employment. 
4