1  
 
THE SHERIDAN COLLEGE 
INSTITUTE  OF TECHNOLOGY  AND 
ADVANCED LEARNING 
Title:  Acceptable  Use Policy 
Original  Date:  May 16, 2011  
Date  of Approval:  November 
13, 2024  Effective  Date:  November  13, 2024  
 
Last Review  Date:  November  13, 2024 Approved  By: 
☐ Board of 
Governors  
☒ President 
and Vice 
Presidents  
 
 
1. Purpose  
 
Thi
s Acceptable Use Policy  (“Policy’’)  governs  the utilization  of technology  systems and tools,  including 
computers,  software,  communication networks,  and cloud- based technologies  at the Sheridan College 
Institute  of Technology  and Advanced Learning (“Sheridan’’).  The Policy  does  not attempt  to anticipate 
every situation that may arise and is meant to serve as instructions for anyone accessing Sheridan 
Information Technology (“IT”) Resources.  
 
Thi
s policy  exists for Sheridan to: 
• Maintain and operate Sheridan IT Resources  
• Ensure the proper  use of Sheridan IT Resources  
• Ensure compliance with the law 
• Meet  Sheridan’s  operational  needs  
 
2. Scope  
 
Thi
s Policy applies to all Sheridan employees, students, alumni, contractors, and other individuals 
using Sheridan IT Resources.  The requirements  set out in this Policy  are applicable to the use of all 
data,  systems, electronic  and computing devices,  and services owned  and/or  managed  by Sheridan.  
 
3. Definitions  
 
“A
ccess ” refers  to access to systems,  services, and information that is accessible through  such 
services.  
“Account ” refers  to an identity  created  for an individual  in a computer  or computing system, consisting 
of a unique username and password. This identity allows the individual to log in and Access Sheridan 
IT Resources.  
 
"A
ccount  Holder ” or “Individual ” is the individual  for whom  the Account  was provisioned,  and the 
individual who uses or is responsible for the Account. 
“CASL ” means  Canada’s  Anti-Spam  Legislation.  
2  “Commercial Electronic Message” means an electronic message that, having regard to the content 
of the message,  the hyperlinks  in the message to content  on a website  or other  database,  or the contact 
information contained in the message,  it would  be reasonable to conclude  has as its purpose,  or one of 
its purposes, to encourage participation in a commercial activity.  
“Information Technology (IT)” shall refer to Sheridan’s  Information Technology  (IT) Department.  
 
“I
nformation Technology (IT) Resources ” includes all Sheridan owned or managed hardware and 
software assets, including computers, communication networks, systems / applications, and cloud - 
based solutions.  
 
4. Policy 
 
A
ccess granted to Sheridan IT Resources is intended for Sheridan business and educational use and 
any incidental use outside of Sheridan should not be to the detriment  of Sheridan or any of its students 
or employees. IT Resources will not be used for employment purposes outside of Sheridan.  
 
A
ll requirements below apply regardless of whether Access is initiated on- site, through a remote 
location, or using personal and/or individual equipment.  
4.1 Account  Use 
 
• A
ccounts  may only be accessed by  the Individual  to whom the Account was  assigned unless 
otherwise stated in this Policy.  
• The Account and password must be kept secure. Individuals must log out of the Account or 
lock Access to an IT Resource when leaving it unattended. The password should never be 
shared.  
• The Account Holder is fully responsible for any information or data, including those in digital 
storage services or other resources tied to their Account.  
• Account  Holders  must  not use Sheridan Accounts  for personal  or political reasons.  
• Accounts must not be used for conducting personal or private business and/or sending 
electronic  messages  to promote  outside  commercial  activity  without  written  authorization from 
Sheridan.  
4.2 Legal  / Compliance 
 
• A
ccess is not to be used for any illegal purpose.  
• Access must  not be used by any person for the purpose of gaining illegitimate  or unauthorized 
Access to Accounts, IT Resources, files, systems, databases, or information within any of Sheridan IT Resources  or for the purpose of breaking into any other  system outside Sheridan. 
No one shall view, change, enter, add, delete or alter any information within Sheridan IT Resources without proper authorization.  
• Account  Holders  must  not use Sheridan  IT Resources  or Access for the creation,  transmission, 
storage, Access or viewing of materials prohibited by federal and/or provincial law, or which, 
in the opinion of Sheridan, are offensive by community standards and values.  
• I
ndividuals  are expected to communicate in a professional  and respectful  manner,  adhering to 
all Sheridan policies  and procedures  including,  but not limited  to, the Student  Code  of Conduct, 
Code for Professionalism and Civility, and Harassment and Discrimination Policy. 
• Access must  not be used  to harass,  threaten,  or annoy  others  or to store  or send  messages  
3  which are obscene, abusive, threatening, libelous, defamatory, or harassing. This would 
include sending unwanted e- mails to another after being requested not to do so.  
• Using IT Resources to visit pornographic sites, or for the storage or dissemination of 
pornographic material, is prohibited.  
• Individuals must be aware of and respect all copyrights, trademarks, and other intellectual 
property rights for materials, including the use of the Sheridan logo.  
• Individuals must not represent themselves as acting on behalf of Sheridan unless properly 
authorized to do so.  
• Individuals must not use Sheridan IT Resources for the creation, transmission, storage, 
Access or viewing of materials, or any use of Sheridan IT Resources in a way that 
compromises Sheridan’s legitimate interests.  
4.3 Malicious  / Inappropriate Activity  
 
• I
ndividuals must not attempt to circumvent any  security  or control  measures implemented on 
Sheridan systems.  
• Individuals  must  not use any Sheridan IT resources  for the purpose  of creation,  development, 
storage, replication or transmittal of any program, code, subroutine, or other means (e.g., 
viruses, worms, hack utilities) intended to disrupt, interfere, destroy, or corrupt the normal 
operation of systems, data, or the work of others.  
• Access must not be used to deliberately interfere with or destroy one’s own work or the work 
of others. Authorized Sheridan representatives might at times monitor Accounts for security purposes based on reasonable suspicion of a breach. For more details, see section on 
‘Monitoring of Use’ below.  
• Individuals must refrain from monopolizing systems, overloading networks with excessive 
data, degrading services, or wasting computer time, disk space, printer paper, or other 
resources.  
4.4 Privacy / Confidentiality / Integrity  
 
• S
heridan operates  in compliance with existing  freedom  of information  and protection of privacy 
legislation.  Individuals who access personal information of students, employees, and others 
on behalf  of Sheridan  must  keep such information  confidential  and use it only for meeting their 
responsibilities to Sheridan.  
• Individuals must not access information about their colleagues, their relatives, or their 
acquaintances under any circumstances, unless authorized.  
• Individuals must not alter information about themselves, their colleagues, their relatives, or 
their acquaintances under any circumstances, unless authorized.  
4.5 Security 
 
• I
ndividuals  must  use password protection  and security  features  (e.g.,  endpoint  / device 
protection software for example) provided by Sheridan, as required.  
• Individuals  must  not open  message  attachments  or click on hyperlinks  from unknown sources.  
• Individuals  must  not send  sensitive information  from their devices  or Accounts,  that is not 
appropriately protected (e.g., encrypted or tagged as sensitive).  
• If an Individual suspects  that their Account  has been compromised,  they must  reset  their 
passwords immediately at the ‘Sign in’ prompt. They should also reach out to IT.  
4  4.6 Removable Media  (only applicable to employees)  
 
• In
formation  should  only be stored on removable  media when required in the employee’s  role 
(i.e., USB shared between two employees during a conference).  
• Removable media must  not be utilized  to store  and/or  transmit  confidential  or restricted data 
unless  absolutely  necessary;  if there arises  such a requirement,  the removable  media  should 
be encrypted as outlined in Sheridan’s Encryption Standard.  
• Any unknown removable  media that is  found unattended must be surrendered to security or 
the IT Service Desk and NOT inserted into any Sheridan issued device.  
• Employees  must  take reasonable measures  to secure removable media when not in use and 
prevent unauthorized Access.  
• Upon completion of the assigned duties,  all data must  be deleted from the removable media.  
 
4
.7 Data  Security  
 
• A
ll institutional  data is owned by Sheridan and must  be protected  appropriately.  
• Stewardship of Sheridan’s  data records  should adhere to the Records  and Information Management 
Policy.  
• Individuals  must  not view,  copy,  alter,  or destroy  data,  software,  documentation,  or data 
communications belonging to Sheridan or another Individual without authorized permission.  
• Individuals must only access data provided to  them for duties in connection with their employment 
or engagement and in accordance with their terms and conditions of employment or equivalent.  
• Individuals  must  follow all company -sanctioned data removal  procedures  to permanently  erase  data 
from devices once its use is no longer required.  
 
4
.8 Monitoring of Use 
 
S
heridan recognizes  the value of being able to work  and study  without  concern of being under  constant 
surveillance and therefore does not routinely monitor the activities of Individuals while they use 
Sheridan IT Resources. Sheridan does, however, perform periodic random audits for system security 
purposes and will investigate situations based on reasonable suspicion of a breach. All Sheridan IT 
Resources remain the property of Sheridan and are provided to advance its vision and goals. Accordingly, Sheridan reserves the right to examine any electronic files including emails, and web- 
based personal emails accessed on a Sheridan network, where Sheridan, in its sole discretion, 
determines that it has reason to do so.  
The s
ituations  in which  Sheridan may decide to examine an Individual’s  electronic  files include but are 
not limited to:  
• During  an investigation  of a suspected  breach  or violation  of existing  laws,  policies,  or guidelines; 
or 
• If compelled to do so by any law, including a request  for information  under  the Freedom  of 
Information & Protection of Privacy Act or Personal Health Information Protection Act) ; or 
• Where necessary to carry out urgent operational requirements during an employee’s absence 
when alternative arrangements have not been made; or  
• When necessary  to identify  or diagnose systems or security vulnerabilities  and problems,  or 
otherwise protect the integrity of the information communication technology systems; or  
• During  periodic  random  audits  for system security reasons.  
 
A
ccess will only occur  after appropriate authorization is received.  
5  It should be noted  that files stored  electronically  have an existence that differs  from paper  files. While 
paper documents may be shredded, electronic documents may exist in multiple locations — on 
multiple servers or other backup and storage devices. The act of deletion from hardware does not 
assure  permanent  erasure.  Individuals  should be aware that files stored  on Sheridan’s  network  may 
be accessed by Sheridan after the files are deleted. 
 
4
.8.1. Electronic  Discovery/Analysis 
At certain times, Sheridan might need access to a device for security and/or electronic discovery/analysis purposes. In these situations, the Individual is responsible for providing the device to the IT Security department along with any necessary device codes (e.g., passwords, 
codes / device personal identification numbers) to obtain access. Access will be undertaken in a 
manner that, to the extent possible, preserves the privacy of the Individual.  
 
 
4
.9 Account  Management  
 
M
anagers have the responsibility of requesting either Account revocation or removal of privileges to 
Sheridan’s IT Department when their employees: 
• Permanently  leave  Sheridan;  or 
• Go on temporarily  leave;  or 
• Change positions  
 
The c
hanges to account privileges will be activated, when possible, within 24 hours of the date of 
termination or reassignment.  
Accounts  that are suspended / locked  when employees  leave,  are deleted  within  thirty  days  along with 
all data contained in the Individual’s mailboxes, Microsoft OneDrive folders, Microsoft Teams 
communications / messages, unless other arrangements have been approved and confirmed.  
Any ‘shared / group / team’  data such as SharePoint  folders  and files of which  the Individual was a part 
of and any Teams channel (e.g., group – chat communications / messages) will not be deleted.  
 
D
ata in voice mailboxes will be cleared on the date of termination/reassignment, unless otherwise 
requested by the employee’s manager or Human Resources. Sheridan’s IT department also deactivates Accounts based on an employee’s termination/leave date and student withdrawal/graduation date. All deletion of information as contemplated by this section will be 
suspended when it is or  could be expected to become relevant to a legal claim, audit,  or investigation.  
 
A
ccounts that belong to active employees who are going on leave from Sheridan for more than sixty 
days, and who will not require Access while they are absent from Sheridan, should be disabled 
immediately to discourage unauthorized Access. There may be exceptional circumstances where 
Access is required;  this will be determined by the Individual’s  manager  in consultation with their human 
resources  business  partner.  Sheridan  may access  a former  employee's  emails,  electronic  files, or other 
electronic communications to obtain records necessary for business continuity or other legitimate 
business  or legal  reasons.  Access will be undertaken in a manner  that, to the extent  possible,  preserves 
the privacy  of former  employees.  Access requests  will be reviewed on a case- by-case basis  and subject 
to approval as outlined in the guideline for departed employees’ data.  
6  4.10 Discontinuing Access 
 
A
ccess, all or in part, to  Sheridan IT Resources can be terminated or suspended without notice to the 
Individual for proper cause, including when: 
• An Individual has violated this Policy or there is reasonable suspicion they have violated this  
Policy; or  
• Employment  of the Individual is terminated  regardless  of reason;  or 
• The Individual is on leave from Sheridan for greater  than sixty days  regardless  of reason;  or 
• There is Account  activity  that overextends  the resources  or otherwise  disrupts  the functioning of 
the network; or  
• An Individual’s  Account  has been compromised  or accessed by an unauthorized party.  
 
T
his list  is not exhaustive  and does  not represent  all the circumstances where  Access to Sheridan 
IT Resources could be terminated or suspended.  
 
5. Electronic Communications 
Employees  sending a Commercial  Electronic  Message on behalf  of Sheridan are required  to comply 
with CASL, follow all applicable Sheridan procedures and must seek assistance if in doubt as to 
whether their messaging activity involves sending a Commercial Electronic Message. All Sheridan electronic  communications  must  utilize  a platform  approved by Sheridan.  All employees  will only use 
their Sheridan e -mail addresses for all communications around Sheridan business and related 
activities.  
• Sheridan e- mail addresses  shall be considered the official means  of communicating with all 
students and employees and may be the sole means of communication.  
o Account  Holders  should  check  their email  account(s)  frequently  and consistently  to stay 
current with Sheridan- related communications unless on a Sheridan- approved leave.  
o Students  are responsible for checking both their @sheridancollege.ca email  account  for 
Office of the Registrar and/or other Sheridan administrative communications and the messaging system associated with the designated learning management system for 
course- related communications.  
o Individuals are responsible for recognizing that certain communications may be time 
critical. Failure to read a notification in a timely manner does not release the employee 
and/or student from the obligation to know of and/or comply with its content.  
To maintain  efficient  and effective  communication within  our institution, all students,  staff, and faculty 
are required  to use the published support  channels  when contacting service areas  for support.  Direct 
communication with Individuals or escalating issues outside of these designated channels is 
discouraged, as it can lead to delays, miscommunication, and inefficiencies.  
 
7. R
oles and Responsibilities 
 
7
.1 Sheridan’s  Information  Technology Department  (IT) 
Besides  the items  listed  across  this Policy,  IT is responsible for: 
• Providing secure and reliable  IT infrastructure  and monitoring systems for compliance.  
• Implementing technical controls to safeguard data, managing access rights, and ensuring that 
all Sheridan IT Resources are protected against unauthorized access and misuse.  
• Providing guidance on best practices,  offers  training on acceptable use standards,  and regularly 
updates security protocols to adapt to emerging threats. 
7  7.2 Managers 
Managers  are responsible for: 
• Determining and arranging for their employees’  specific  Access;  
• Ensuring their employees are familiar with policies around the appropriate use of Sheridan IT 
Resources;  
• Reporting instances of suspected misuse or unacceptable use of Sheridan IT Resources by a 
Sheridan employee,  contractor,  volunteer,  co-op student,  student  worker,  visitor,  or other  person 
for whom  they are responsible to Human  Resources  and system security  concerns/vulnerabilities 
to IT;  
• Ensuring that Access is removed when an Individual leaves Sheridan or their responsibilities 
change.  
 
7
.3 Employees  
Employees  have a shared  responsibility  towards  protecting  Sheridan  IT Resources.  Employees  are 
responsible for reporting instances of suspected misuse or unacceptable use of Sheridan IT 
Resources by a Sheridan student to the Office of Student Rights and Responsibilities, Student Services, and system security concerns/vulnerabilities to IT. 
7.3 Human Resources  
The Human  Resources  department  is the primary  contact  for a manager  dealing with issues relating 
to any Sheridan  employees  and the misuse of his/her  rights  and responsibilities.  Human  Resources 
will work with managers to take appropriate action in managing situations of misuse. 
7.4 Student  Services  
Student  Services  is the primary  contact  for dealing with issues  relating  to student  conduct.  Student 
Services will initiate any formal disciplinary actions involving students. Complaints regarding 
student violations related to this Policy should be referred to the Office of Student Rights and 
Responsibilities, Student Services.  
8. 
Policy  Compliance  
 
I
ndividuals  should obtain clarification  from their department  and IT for any IT related questions  (i.e., 
when unsure about whether a planned use of a software / tool is acceptable), using the below channels:  
• Service Sheridan (or) 
• Phone:  905-845-9430 ext. 2150 (or) 
• Support  Chat 
Sheridan may take appropriate disciplinary  measures  in cases  of attempted  violation  of this Policy, 
regardless of the attempt's success or failure.  
 
An
y attempt  to circumvent  local,  provincial,  federal,  or international  laws utilizing  Sheridan IT 
Resources may result in litigation against the offender by the appropriate authorities.  
8  Please note that any violation  of this Policy  by Sheridan employees  may result  in serious  sanctions 
up to and including dismissal. Any  violation by  students may  result in serious sanctions up to and 
including expulsion. If there are any  questions concerning the Policy, please direct those inquiries 
to one of the following:  
 
i. H
uman Resources  
ii. Student  Services  
iii. IT using the channels  listed  above 
 
I
ssues relating to student misuse will be referred to the Office of Student Rights and Responsibilities, 
Student Services; issues involving employee misuse will be referred to Human Resources.  
The Responsible Office  for this Policy  is the AVP and CIO as delegated by the Vice President, 
Administrative Services.  
 
9. R
elated Documents 
 
C
ASL Checklist  
CASL  Explanatory  Slide  Deck  
CASL  (Canada’s  Anti-Spam  Legislation)  Q & A  
Criminal Code of Canada  
Copyright  Act Canada  
Discrimination  and Harassment  Policy  & 
Procedure  
Employee Technology  Policy  
Free Speech  Policy  
Social Media Policy  
Records  and Information  Management  Policy  
Privacy Policy  
Password Management  Procedure  
Guideline for Access to Departed Employees'  Emails,  Files  or Communications  
Sheridan’s Encryption Standard  
Information  Security  Policy