Audit Logging and Monitoring Policy 
Template
This is an example policy. Please ensure you update this policy template so that it’s suitable for your organisation.
Purpose
To address the regulatory requirements for safeguarding the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information assets through auditing, logging, and monitoring activities.
To verify compliance with access controls and administrative and other safeguards developed and implemented to prevent or limit inappropriate access to data.
To ensure that routine and random audits are utilised as oversight tools for recording and examining access to information. For example, who accessed what data and when.
Scope
This policy applies to all parties who access or use our information assets, regardless of physical location.
Information technology (IT) resources include all owned, licensed, leased, or managed hardware and software, and use of our network through a physical or wireless connection. This is regardless of the ownership of the computing device connected to the network.
This policy applies to: 
IT administered centrally
personally-owned computing devices connected by wire or wirelessly to our network 
off-site computing devices that connect remotely to our network
Policy
This policy aims to ensure that appropriate safeguards are in place and effective, <organisation> shall audit, log, and monitor access and events to detect, report, and guard against:
network vulnerabilities and intrusions
performance problems and flaws in applications 
security violations
data loss
unauthorized access to confidential data – including attorney-client privileged information
breaches in confidentiality and security of confidential data
degradation or loss of information integrity – such as improper alteration or destruction of confidential data
We’re committed to conducting business in compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and our own policies. 
The following events may be audited:
normal system events – such as start-up, shutdown, login attempts, errors, security policy changes, software installations
information changes (create, read, update, delete) that include confidential data
unauthorized access to confidential data for non-permitted purposes
system management activities – including execution of privileged functions
information exchanges containing confidential data
activities relating to administration account(s)
Audit Record Retention:
Audit records shall be retained and archived for a minimum of 7 years.
Exceptions
Exceptions to the guiding principles in this policy must be documented and formally approved by the <role> and the <organisation>. 
Policy exceptions must describe:
the nature of the exception
a reasonable explanation for why the policy exception is required
any risks created by the policy exception
evidence of approval by all appropriate parties
Review of this policy: this will be reviewed annually by the <role>.
Next review date: <date month year>