THE ULTIMATE GUIDE 
TO ACCESS CONTROL 
SYSTEMS
What access control is and why it’s important to security
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
Access control definition
 
The role of access control security, or the true access control security 
meaning, is to regulate who can enter a building or a space. Its aim is to 
minimize risk to a business or organization.
To secure facilities, organizations deploy electronic access control systems 
that incorporate user credentials, access control readers, auditing and 
reports to manage and track access to restricted locations. They may also 
deploy alarms and lockdown capabilities to prevent unauthorized access or 
control operations in restricted areas.Electronic access control has replaced traditional lock and key systems as 
a more secure and convenient method of controlling access, overcoming 
the problems of lost or stolen keys, retooling locks and the inability to view 
access activity. 
Another subset of access controls, information security can include ways 
to limit who has access to computer systems or networks. Also known as 
cybersecurity access control, these types of methods are used both on the 
premises and in cloud-based platforms to help ensure data and information 
remains protected. When combined with physical security methods, it’s often 
referred to as security convergence, a growing trend in the security industry.THE ULTIMATE GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL
Access control systems are an important and integral element of security systems to protect property, people and 
resources. Door access control systems determine who is authorized to enter a property or a restricted area within 
a property and provide various techniques to manage and control access. 
Access control security is used in many different types of building, including campuses, office blocks, commercial 
buildings, multi-tenant apartment buildings, industrial complexes, condos, gated communities, schools and 
colleges, airports, stadiums and government buildings. 
This article explains what access control is and why it’s important to security. You’ll also learn about the benefits 
and use cases for access control, as well as access control policies and the components of an access control 
system. 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
Why access control security is 
important
In short, replacing traditional locks and keys with electronic security and 
access control strengthens security. Traditional locks have many drawbacks, 
including management challenges, lack of audit trails and the fact that metal 
keys are easily lost, stolen and copied.
Electronic credentials are more difficult to steal or copy, and they require 
validation before an individual can gain access, which gives security teams 
greater ability to control access. Electronic access control systems can be 
programmed with different levels of access for individual users and groups, 
which enables security teams to impose the strongest levels of security 
where they are needed most. 
Flexibility and control are important because, compared to single-family 
residential properties, commercial buildings must provide convenient, secure 
access to large numbers of occupants and their visitors, who might include 
friends or family, business visitors, couriers delivering mail, packages or 
food, contractors or tradespeople carrying out maintenance work.
A commercial access control system is important at building entrances, 
where the system provides convenient access for employees, residents or 
other occupants, while preventing intruders or unauthorized individuals from 
entering.
Within a building, access security protects areas where entry must be 
restricted by only allowing users with the right credentials to enter. In an 
office block, this might apply to server rooms or spaces where confidential 
data is stored. In a multifamily residential complex, the access security 
system might limit access to resident-only facilities such as gyms or mail 
rooms. 
A door access control system also provides security teams with important 
information on all entry activities. This can provide useful evidence in the 
event of an incident or suspicious activity. 
How access control security works
A user who is authorized to enter a building or secure area presents 
credentials to an access control reader positioned at the entrance or door. 
The reader transmits the credentials’ data to software which validates the 
credentials against a database of authorized users.If the credentials are valid, the software initiates a door release signal which 
opens an electronic lock to grant access. If the credentials are invalid, or the 
user does not have permissions for that door or time, the door will remain 
locked.
An access control panel is the backbone for the access control system; 
access control panels or controller boards determine the basic functions 
of the system, including the entry decisions. The system also records and 
retains all access requests for analysis, audit or evidence. 
In the case of visitors requesting security access, they will either need 
temporary credentials, such as a visitor badge or digital guest pass. If 
the occupant or front desk has the ability to operate the access control 
mechanism, either via a button or app, they can issue a door release signal 
to grant access.
What is an access control policy? 
To impose the right level of security and access at entrances to restricted 
areas, security professionals or property managers must enforce access 
control policies. These fall into five main categories: 
• Discretionary access control (DAC): The owner or administrator of 
the property sets the access control policy defining who is authorized 
to access the building or a specific area. This type of access control 
provides minimal levels of security.
• Mandatory access control (MAC): Security professionals grant and 
manage access rights based on multiple levels of security. Access is 
granted or denied based on the user’s security clearance level. This 
category is used to protect highly secure areas. 
• Attribute-based access control (ABAC): This approach provides 
access to users based on who they are, rather than what they 
do. Access permissions can be based on the user’s type, location, 
department and duties, mirroring the organizational structure of the 
business.
• Role-based access control (RBAC): Access is based on defined 
business functions rather than the individual user’s identity. The aim is 
to provide users with access only to areas that are deemed necessary 
for their roles within the organization. 
• Rule-based access control: An administrator defines rules that 
govern access to an area. These rules may be based on conditions, 
such as time of day and location. 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
Access control functions
 
Access security has five main functions: 
• Authorization: The access control system administrator specifies 
individual users’ access rights to areas or resources. For example, 
employees are authorized to enter a building, but only authorized to 
enter restricted areas relevant to their grade or job function.
• Authentication: The system or an individual validates an entry 
request such as the identity of a person or the credentials they 
present. For example, a resident checks a video image of a visitor 
before granting access, or the system validates credentials against a 
database of authorized users. 
• Access: When the system has authenticated a request, it grants 
access by opening a locked door.
• Management: Security administrators manage the access control 
database by adding or removing authorized users so that the access 
control devices only validate requests based on current information.
• Audit and review: Regular reviews and audits minimize the risk 
of users retaining access rights they no longer require. Audits also 
provide essential records for compliance. 
Reporting is also an important function. Each time a user requests access, 
the system generates data that provides important management information. 
The system records all access requests with details of location, user identity 
and type of credential used. Notifications also provide insight into potential 
security issues, such as tailgating, doors left open or access requests from 
unidentified users.
The data from door access control helps security professionals monitor the 
performance of the systems through reports such as:
• Door activity history recording who opened a specific door and at 
what time
• Invalid access attempts where users attempt to use their credentials 
at an unauthorized access point
• Door openings, door forced open or door left open too long 
Access security configuration 
 
System administrators use the information from the authorization process to 
configure access levels for users and access locations. They rank locations 
based on the level of security and authority required to gain access. They 
can then configure the credentials issued to individual users. 
Access control software can also configure user credentials to automatically 
expire by specific dates, based on the completion of a project, for example, 
or the date when a resident leaves their tenancy. The software can also 
configure temporary credentials for a one-time event, for example, where attendees will only require access for emergency maintenance or a vendor 
visit. 
Building owners may wish to restrict general access to a building at certain 
times, such as evenings or weekends. Software can configure all credentials 
to be invalid at those times. It’s also important to put emergency measures in 
place so that access control systems can automatically operate in lockdown 
mode in the event of a fire or other emergency.
Security access locations 
 
Security access control examples are found in many internal and external 
areas of a building or campus that need to be secured and controlled. Here 
are a few examples of common areas for access control security to be 
installed:
• Main entrance: This might be a reception area where check-in is 
automated and employees and visitors must present credentials. 
There may be multiple entrances to a building, so it is essential that 
they are all covered by access control techniques. 
• Turnstiles: These might be located close to the main entrance as 
a means of access control where there is public lobby access, but 
restricted access to the rest of the building. They may also be located 
on other floors or zones that need to be secured.
• Car lot or parking garage entrance: Entry may be secured by a 
gate or other form of barrier that limits access to authorized vehicles 
and visitors. 
• Elevators: Access control systems may be used to manage numbers 
of occupants or to control access to certain floors.
• Server rooms: All entrances must be secured, allowing only 
authorized users.
• Perimeter: In a building or campus with a large perimeter, security 
access can be installed at gates, barriers or other entrance points to 
manage the flow of visitors and vehicles. 
It’s also essential to identify other areas that are vulnerable to intrusion, 
represent a security risk, or where it’s important to manage movement:
• Vulnerable areas: These include emergency exits, windows or 
unsecured exterior doors where intruders could gain access without 
detection.
• Areas with a security risk: In commercial buildings these include 
certain offices, storage areas or meeting rooms where confidential 
information is held. In multi-occupant residential buildings, these 
might include storage rooms or resident-only facilities such as gyms 
or recreation areas. 
• Areas to manage movement: These include lobbies, stairways and 
passages where it’s essential to avoid overcrowding. AUTHENTICA TION AUTHORIZA TION ACCESS MANAGE AUDI T
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
information, which increases security while retaining convenience. 
• Mobile solutions: Users download an app to their smartphone or 
other mobile device. Depending on the access control system, they 
scan the smartphone at the reader or use an unlock feature in the app 
to gain access. Mobile credentials support regular use for authorized 
users, or temporary access to specific areas for visitors, contractors or 
service staff. 
• Biometric solutions: Biometric door locks combine strong security 
with convenience for authorized users. The most widely used 
solutions include fingerprint door locks, facial ID and eye scan door 
locks for retinas or irises. Biometric solutions overcome the problems 
of lost or stolen credentials because they are extremely difficult to 
copy. • PIN codes: PIN codes are convenient, but require users to remember 
their codes. General codes can be used in low-risk areas, with 
individual codes issued for higher-security entrances. 
• Swipe cards: These badges feature codes on a magnetic strip. Users 
swipe the cards through a reader to request access. While they are 
convenient, they can present a security risk if users swap or lose 
cards that can be used by intruders.
• Proximity key cards and key fobs: Proximity solutions use RFID 
technology to provide contactless access. Users present RFID-enabled 
key cards or key fobs when they are close to a reader. This makes 
them a simple, convenient form of access for high-traffic areas. 
• Smart cards or smart fobs: These advanced cards and fobs 
contain a computer chip that can store additional, unique credential ACCESS CONTROL COMPONENTS
Door access control systems have a number of basic components, each with its own importance for a fully 
functioning system. It’s important to understand how access control components influence the convenience and 
security of the system in order to deploy a solution that fits your needs. 
Door access control credentials  
Credentials are what users will present to a door reader when they want to enter the building. There are six main types of credentials that offer different levels 
of security and convenience: 
The systems to capture biometric credentials and the scanners required to read them are expensive, and this initially limited their use to protecting highly 
secure areas. However, if budgets allow, they can also be used as a fast, convenient method of access in high-traffic areas.
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
• Intercom readers: This type of access control device combines 
reader technology with two-way audio, and is commonly used on front 
doors to help verify visitors prior to granting entry. 
Controllers and access control boards 
These are the “brains” of the access control system, acting as a link 
between the door reader and the user database. These units are usually 
installed behind restricted doors, as they contain vital data and information 
that should be protected. 
Access control software and data storage 
The software for access control systems is a vital tool for managing the 
database of authorized users. The database holds the details of the network 
of access controlled doors and authorized users together with their access 
levels. 
To maintain security, it’s essential to keep the database up to date by 
adding new users and removing users who have left or who no longer have 
permissions to access specific areas.
There are two options for hosting access control software: on-site in servers 
or hosted in the cloud accessible via the Internet. 
Access control devices can produce high volumes of data, particularly 
if the system incorporates video or biometric credentials which create 
very large file sizes. If data volumes grow, additional servers may be 
required for an on-site system. Cloud storage is more scalable; if capacity 
requirements increase, additional capacity is available on demand for a Door readers  
Door readers can be installed inside and outside of the building to provide 
security for areas with different levels of vulnerability. There are different 
types of security door readers for use with corresponding credentials. They 
include:
• Keypad readers: Users key in a general or unique PIN using the 
keypad. Although this type of reader is simple and convenient to 
use, PINs can be shared, guessed or used by intruders with stolen 
credentials, especially when buttons wear over time. Capacitive touch 
keypads and longer-digit unique PINs help combat these challenges. 
• Key card swipe readers: Users swipe their key cards through the 
reader. Although these readers are secure, they may require frequent 
maintenance if they are used in areas of heavy traffic. 
• RFID key card or key fob readers: This type of contactless reader 
is more suitable for heavy traffic areas. Readers simply present their 
credentials when they are within range of the reader. 
• Biometric readers: Users present one of their approved biometric 
attributes, which are scanned for validation against a biometric 
database. For even higher levels of security, biometric solutions can 
be used as part of two-factor authentication with other credentials. 
• Smart door lock readers: These readers are designed to operate 
with different types of credentials. They can also be programmed 
for two-factor authentication using a combination of credentials to 
increase security levels. 
• Video door readers: Video door readers have a camera embedded 
into the access control device, giving security teams visual evidence 
of identity and any security issues.
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
Data networks and cabling
Dedicated cabling has traditionally been used to connect security access 
components. However, cabling can be expensive to install and maintain, with 
additional installation costs if the system changes or expands.
Data networks offer a more flexible alternative for IP-based systems. Access 
control components, such as readers and control units, can be connected to 
existing networks wirelessly or using Power over Ethernet (PoE), reducing 
installation costs and offering simpler, faster scalability.
A fast, secure and reliable data network is essential for efficient access 
control operations. The networks must be able to transmit signals securely 
between controllers, readers and electronic locks. 
Data networks must be capable of transmitting high volumes of data at high 
speed to minimize the risk of slow response times. To maintain performance, 
the network should provide high bandwidth availability and functionality 
such as traffic prioritization to support bandwidth-hungry traffic such as 
video images or data from biometric devices. 
Power supply 
An access control system requires power for door readers, controllers and 
electronic door locks. Power can be connected using conventional cabling 
to each component or supplied via a data network using PoE technology. 
This simplifies installation and reduces costs because no separate cabling is 
required. 
As part of your access control best practices, it is recommended that each 
component also have a backup power supply, so that doors can still be 
functional in the event of an Internet or power outage. higher subscription. In some cases, a hybrid option may be available, which 
is particularly useful for businesses with multiple locations.
Another key differentiator in these system options is that on-site servers 
have to be maintained and updated by an internal IT team. All maintenance 
and updating of cloud-based systems is usually handled by the hosting 
company as part of the subscription. 
Cloud storage for access control devices offers the additional benefit of 
remote access. Security teams are no longer restricted to reviewing data on-
site. If data is stored in the cloud, security teams can also access the data 
from any location using an Internet-connected fixed or mobile device. This 
increases flexibility, allowing teams to remotely monitor and operate keyless 
locking systems outside of normal business hours. 
Electronic locks for door access control 
Electronic door entry systems remain closed until a user’s credentials 
are validated and a ‘release’ signal unlocks them. There are two types of 
electronic door locks for commercial keyless entry: 
Electric strike locks are fitted to the inside of a door frame where they 
replace conventional lock strike plates. A small motor on the strike is 
connected to a power supply and the current holds the strike plate in the 
locked position. When an access controller submits a ‘release’ signal, the 
motor releases the strike plate allowing an authorized user to open the door.
Magnetic strikes incorporate an electromagnet attached to the door frame, 
which bonds to a metal plate on the door. The door remains locked while 
an electric current is flowing through the electromagnet. When a user’s 
credentials are validated, the access controller sends a signal which cuts the 
power, breaking the magnetic bond and allowing the user to open the door.
Commercial security doors  
Electronic locks for access control are generally used in conjunction with 
commercial security doors, which have the strength and durability to resist 
threats. These doors can cope with high traffic volumes and continuous use 
by larger numbers of users with minimal maintenance. They also have the 
performance to withstand different internal and external environmental 
conditions, such as extreme weather conditions. 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
can be integrated with security access to trigger local or building-wide 
lockdown in the event of an emergency. 
Software applications can also be integrated with access control systems 
for more efficient management. For example, syncing identity platforms 
with access control ensures credential databases are always up-to-date, 
and connecting visitor management platforms gives security teams greater 
control and visibility over guest access within a property.
Video cameras, alarms, sensors, access control devices and electronic 
locking systems should be built to open standards so that they can be easily 
integrated into a comprehensive security system that provides the highest 
level of protection for people and property. Security video cameras monitor vulnerable areas inside and outside 
commercial properties to identify and record incidents. By installing video 
cameras at restricted areas covered by access control systems, security 
professionals can monitor and analyze the camera feeds so that they can 
respond rapidly to any incidents. 
Integrating security access data with video feeds enables security teams to 
identify suspects more easily in the event of an incident. 
Fitting alarms and sensors to external doors and windows extends security 
coverage and ensures that security teams receive immediate notifications 
of any attempt to break into the building. When integrated with the access 
control system, this allows security teams to quickly identify a door forced 
or propped open, or remotely unlock a door if needed. Smoke and fire alarms 
INTEGRATING DOOR ACCESS CONTROL 
SYSTEMS WITH OTHER SECURITY SOLUTIONS
Access control systems provide an essential first line of defense against unauthorized access. However, 
integrating access control devices with other security system components can strengthen protection even further 
and provide security professionals with a single 360-degree view of activity throughout a building.
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
Greater convenience for users 
 
Credentials for security access control systems are available in different 
forms, all offering users convenient access. Proximity solutions, for example, 
allow users to enter high-traffic areas quickly and easily, while biometric 
solutions eliminate the need for separate credentials. Mobile credentials can 
increase convenience even further by allowing users and visitors to identify 
themselves using a smartphone app. When choosing and developing an 
access control policy, make sure to provide staff training on how to use the 
new system. 
Simpler user management 
Security teams no longer have to issue, manage and replace large numbers 
of individual keys, which could prove expensive in a building with many 
different lockable doors and entrances. Adopting mobile credentials 
simplifies management even further. Teams do not have to issue key cards 
or key fobs; they simply send a link to smartphone apps programmed with 
individual access levels.Stronger security 
Replacing traditional locks and keys with electronic access control 
mechanisms strengthens security. It eliminates the problem of lost or stolen 
keys and replaces them with electronic credentials offering different levels 
of security. Electronic credentials are more difficult to copy and they require 
validation before a user can gain access, which gives security teams greater 
ability to control access.
Targeted security 
Security professionals can deploy different types of door access control 
systems or program electronic credentials with different levels of access. 
This enables security teams to impose the strongest levels of security where 
they are needed most. For example, smart key cards can be programmed 
with unique codes to protect highly secure areas, or users can be assigned 
mobile access permissions based on their titles or work schedules. Mobile or 
RFID credentials can also be paired with other credentials, such as PIN codes 
or biometrics, to support two-factor authentication. BENEFITS OF ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Investing in access control techniques can transform the security and convenience of building access and deliver 
important operational and financial benefits. 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
cabling. In addition, adding new locations to the access control security 
network in the cloud is just as effortless, with all sites managed from a 
single dashboard.
Consistent security levels 
Cloud-enabled security access systems provide an opportunity to centralize 
security operations and impose consistent security standards, particularly 
for organizations with multiple sites. A central security team can monitor 
and manage all access requests from a single location, or remotely via 
a secure web browser. Centralized management enables security teams 
to standardize permissions and access levels across all sites, which can 
strengthen overall security. 
Detailed audit trails 
Data from access control requests can be useful for analyzing real-time 
access activity as well as providing input for security audits, management 
reporting and compliance records. This type of information can also help 
security teams and property managers assess the efficiency of access control 
and refine best practices over time. 
Streamlined interoperability 
Access control devices designed and built to open standards can be 
integrated with other security components such as sensors, alarms, video 
security cameras, existing access control systems, fire and smoke alarms to 
create a comprehensive security solution that enables security professionals 
to monitor and manage all activity through a single pane of glass. These 
systems can also be integrated with compatible building management 
systems and environmental control platforms to improve overall protection 
and safety in the building. Modern access control system management software also allows teams to 
manage credentials online, handling moves, adds, changes and removals 
with just a few clicks. With cloud-based access control, security teams can 
manage user credentials from any location on any Internet-connected device.
More flexible property management 
A cloud-connected security access system gives teams greater operational 
flexibility. They no longer have to be onsite outside normal business hours 
because they can manage access requests, open or lock doors and monitor 
alerts from any location with a secure Internet connection.
A remote door entry system can provide important security continuity in the 
event of a fire or other disaster that makes it impossible to provide onsite 
security management. Teams can continue to monitor and secure doors from 
a temporary location with Internet connectivity. 
Reduced support burden 
Electronic access security systems require less maintenance than traditional 
manual entry systems. IT staff do not have to manage and maintain 
connectivity and power supply because this is handled by the network team. 
If the system is cloud-enabled, the IT team doesn’t have to manage servers 
or other infrastructure because this is handled by the cloud hosting provider. 
Greater scalability 
Networked access control security systems are easier to scale than 
conventional lock and key systems or access systems connected by 
dedicated cabling. A new door reader can be added to an existing data 
network with no need for the delay or disruption of installing dedicated 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
ACCESS CONTROL AND SMART BUILDINGS 
Access control systems play an essential role in protecting a building and its occupants against threats from 
intruders, but they can also make a wider contribution to building management and the evolution of smart 
buildings. 
While the primary application of access control techniques is to monitor and control access to secured areas, data 
from the system can also provide greater insight into movement and use of facilities within buildings. That can 
provide valuable input into facilities planning to create safer and more efficient routing as well as optimizing space 
utilization. For example, analyzing traffic in spaces such as conference rooms or other busy spaces provides useful 
information on room availability and occupancy levels. 
Access control devices can also be integrated with other elements of building management systems. For example, 
security access data on room occupancy can support more efficient use of heating, lighting, ventilation and other 
facilities by automating the allocation of resources in line with actual occupancy. This can improve resource 
efficiency and reduce overall operating costs. 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
SELECTING AN ACCESS CONTROL SECURITY 
SYSTEM 
There are many factors to take into consideration when selecting a security access control solution for door access control:
Scalability 
For growing businesses, it’s important to have a system that can be easily 
scaled to cover more access points or support additional users. Organizations 
operating across multiple sites can improve operational efficiency if a system 
on one site can be scaled via the cloud to other sites. This will ensure 
consistent security across the organization and reduce overall costs.
Compliance 
The security access control system should enable the business to comply 
with any customer security requirements, data protection requirements 
or industry-specific regulations. For example, customers may require data 
relating to their business to be secured by special measures as part of a 
contract. In some industries, compliance with an international security 
standard such as ISO 27001 is essential for doing business, while business 
in sectors such as healthcare or financial services require even higher levels 
of security compliance. In general, it’s essential to provide security for 
personal data to comply with data protection regulations. 
Cost of ownership 
Cost is one of the most important factors in selecting an access control 
system, not just the initial costs, but the ongoing costs for operating, 
maintaining and managing access control systems. The upfront cost will 
be based on the number of access points to be covered as well as the type 
of components required. The ongoing costs will include installation and 
configuration, operation, monitoring and management, and the costs of 
maintenance, repair and upgrading. Costs may be more predictable with a 
cloud-based solution that includes maintenance and upgrading costs in a 
monthly subscription. 
Access control features 
As well as providing the essential security functions, it’s important to select 
systems that include access control features that save time or improve 
efficiency. For example, automated notifications from the cloud ensure the 
security team has the latest information on potential incidents. A wide 
range of reports will enable security teams to provide different stakeholders 
with the specific information they need for their role. Remote management 
capability improves convenience and flexibility for the IT team, enabling 
them to manage systems and respond to incidents from any location. Security 
The most important factor is security. The system must ensure that only 
authorized users and approved visitors can enter a building. Door access 
security must restrict entry and provide adequate protection for areas of the 
building that contain sensitive information or resources and facilities that 
could harm the business if they were damaged by intruders. 
Reliability 
If a reader or access control unit is not reliable, it reduces the level of 
security. Downtime for repair or maintenance also increases risk and 
inconvenience for users. The equipment should have guaranteed levels of 
uptime and incorporate back-up or failover solutions for high-security areas. 
Convenience
 
Although access control is designed to deter unwanted intruders, it should 
not prove inconvenient for authorized users who require access. The system 
and access control devices should be quick and easy to use and incorporate 
touchless technologies for added convenience. 
Management 
As well as convenience for users, the access control mechanisms and system 
should also be convenient to manage. Operation, configuration, management 
and maintenance should be straightforward with software that’s intuitive to 
use and interoperable with other security tools. Selecting a cloud-enabled 
system simplifies management even further. 
Customization 
System components should be customizable so that security professionals 
can configure them to meet specific requirements for different areas and 
individual users. Look for solutions that offer multiple permissions levels, 
door schedules and custom management dashboards to further streamline 
and control access throughout the property. The system should also be quick 
and easy to reconfigure if security requirements change.
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
GETTING THE BEST ACCESS CONTROL 
SYSTEM FOR YOUR BUILDING
To gain full benefit from security access control, it’s important to plan the solution carefully by assessing vulnerabilities 
and access requirements throughout the building. A professional security system installer can provide advice and 
guidance on the most appropriate solution for different areas of the building and prepare detailed installation plans. 
Security specialists can also recommend integration opportunities to ensure the system forms part of a holistic solution 
for building security and management. 
Here are a few questions to ask when determining which access control features and solutions are the best for your business: 
What access control features are available with 
this system?  
Be sure the system you invest in has a full feature set, with everything 
you need to maintain security in your buildings. Look for customizable user 
permissions, the ability to set door schedules, advanced reporting and audit 
tools, support for multi-factor authentication and automatic alerts. Other 
features you may want include lockdown capabilities, custom rule engines, 
digital guest passes and unification with video security systems.
Does the system integrate with my existing 
security and access control infrastructure? 
Open architecture is an important consideration for access control, as it 
allows you to connect your access control devices to other security systems. 
For the best experience managing and maintaining your security, access 
control systems should be able to seamlessly integrate across your entire 
technology stack, including video systems, alarms and software tools.
How future-proof is this access control system? 
A future-proof system is one that has all the access control features you 
need now, and will also work for any future security challenges the business 
might face. Factors like scalability, ease of integration and automatic 
updates all impact how future-proof a solution is. Consider what the process 
is for upgrading the software with the latest security, and how the company 
rolls out new features to determine the longevity of your access control 
system. How reliable is the access control system?  
Security systems are only worth the investment if they work. Reliable 
door access control systems will have public downtime reports so you can 
compare. Also consider adding backup and fail-over security for your access 
controlled doors. 
Is the system on-premise or cloud-based?  
It’s important to weigh the pros and cons of a cloud-based vs. on-premise 
access control system before investing in new technology. If you have an 
on-prem solution, some providers now offer remote capabilities and hybrid 
cloud deployments to make management more flexible. 
How easy is it for employees to use the access 
control devices?  
You don’t want to make it harder for your staff to get into the building. 
Unlocking the door should be simple, fast and reliable. Touchless access 
control methods are a great way to keep traffic moving in your building, 
without compromising on security. 
What does the installation process look like?  
Before purchasing, know how long your access control system will take to 
install and what the installation project will involve. Do you need to run new 
cabling? Are there existing access control units or readers that you want to 
keep? Be sure to include installation costs in your access control plan. 
EBOOK | GUIDE TO ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEMS
Motorola Solutions, Inc. 500 West Monroe Street, Chicago, IL 60661 U.S.A.  motorolasolutions.com
© 2023, Avigilon Corporation. All rights reserved. MOTOROLA, MOTO, MOTOROLA SOLUTIONS and the Stylized M Logo are trademarks or registered trademarks 
of Motorola Trademark Holdings, LLC and are used under license. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.To learn more, visit:
www.avigilon.com