BOMA Canada  
www.bomacanada.ca
For further information about the guide,  
please contact: 
BOMA Canada 
1 Dundas Street West, Toronto 
Ontario, Canada  M5G 1Z3
info@bomacanada.ca
Cyber Incident Response Guide

This Guide is Sponsored by:
BOMA Canada
2022 Cyber Incident Response Guide
Continually evolving, 
cybersecurity incidents 
have become more 
aggressive and frequent.

2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide3  Cyber Incident Response Guide
Dear friends, 
BOMA Canada is pleased to present the fourth guide 
in our knowledge series on cybersecurity for building 
owners and managers. We seek to provide valuable 
education and tools to our members, and with 
cybersecurity becoming a growing area of concern in 
commercial and residential buildings, this series is aimed 
at providing guidance on this critical subject. 
The BOMA Canada 2019 Cyber Wellness Guide—the 
first guide in the series—introduced cybersecurity 
threats and provided a starting point for buildings’ 
cybersecurity planning. The following year, the BOMA 
Canada Cybersecurity Guide – Procurement, delved 
into embedding cybersecurity practices and preventive 
measures into your procurement processes and 
procedures. The third guide took a  deeper look into 
leveraging the role of supplier relationship management 
(SRM) in cybersecurity. With cybersecurity threats 
becoming more aggressive and sophisticated, it is likely 
that most organizations will be breached at some point 
despite planning and putting checks and balances in 
place. This fourth guide is aimed at helping you respond 
better if you face a breach.
How should this guide be used?  
This guide is intended to introduce building managers 
and owners to the key elements of responding to 
cybersecurity incidents in ways that help reduce its 
negative impacts and expedite your recovery should you 
have a breach. 
This guide is best used in conjunction with comprehensive 
cybersecurity planning, and follows our previous 
cybersecurity guides, so that readers can link dependent 
decisions about how they manage their response to a 
threat. While it is intended to help you respond better, it’s 
not a complete strategy or standard on its own, and needs 
to be supplemented with further reading and adherence 
to specific standards, or the help of professionals, to 
respond effectively. Responding to a breach takes a coordinated and organization-wide collaborative effort 
including your leadership, your information technology 
(IT) department and resources, your team members and 
external advisors. 
We hope you find this guide useful and welcome your 
suggestions on future guides.
Sincerely,
Benjamin Shinewald  
President & CEO  
BOMA CanadaIntroduction

2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide4  
Table of Contents
Introduction 3
Understanding the true impact of a cybersecurity breach 6
Having a plan: Your playbook for response and recovery 7
If you have been breached: Lifecycle of your response  8
1. Dectect and Report 8
2. Plan & Respond 9
3. Recover 12
4. Debrief 12
Appendix A: What underwriters are looking for – 12 key controls 14
Appendix B: Understanding cyber insurance 16
Acknowledgments 18
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide5  Copyright
The Building Owners and Managers Association (BOMA) of 
Canada owns the trademark on the cover of this document. 
Use or reproduction of this trademark is prohibited for any 
purpose (except as part of an accurate reproduction of the 
entire document) unless written permission is first obtained.
This document is subject to copyright protection. However, this 
document may be reproduced free of charge in any format or 
media without requiring specific permission, with the exception 
of its reproduction in whole or in part, in any media or format 
that is wholly or partially for the purpose of commercial gain. 
This permission is subject to the material being reproduced 
accurately and not being used in a derogatory manner or 
in a misleading context. If the material is being published 
or issued to others, the source and copyright status must 
be acknowledged. The permission to reproduce copyright 
protected material does not extend to any material in this 
document that is identified as being the copyright of a third 
party. Authorization to reproduce such materials must be 
obtained directly from the copyright holders concerned.
Disclaimer of Any Legal Liability 
By reading this guide you hereby agree to abide, without 
restriction or limitation of any kind whatsoever, by the 
terms of this disclaimer.
The Building Owners and Managers Association of Canada, 
including all of its officers, directors, employees, advisors, 
consultants, committee members, task force members, 
agents, volunteers and members (hereinafter collectively 
referred to as “BOMA”) has assembled the material in this 
document for the purpose of canvassing potential practices 
in dealing with the potential for a cybersecurity incident. The 
information presented is solely and without exception, express 
or implied, for that purpose. BOMA makes no express or 
implied representations, warranties, guarantees, or promises, 
that the information presented is current or accurate at any 
point in time, be it presently, previously, or at any time in 
the future.The information in these documents is not meant 
in any way to advocate, promote, or suggest any preferred 
method or methods for dealing with a cybersecurity incident. 
Should the user confront any such incident, the users should 
seek professional assistance. Any legal, financial, emergency, 
management, development, structural design, security or 
commercial issue whatsoever should be referred to a qualified 
professional who can properly assess any risks inherent in 
following any plan to address a given issue. The information provided is not a substitute for consulting with an experienced 
and qualified professional. 
BOMA, its partners and affiliates or related organizations 
make no implied or express representation or warranty that 
the information contained herein is without risk. Furthermore, 
absolutely none of these parties accept any responsibility or 
liability for any acts or omissions done or omitted in reliance, 
in whole or in part, on this written report or any of its contents 
or inferences. The same parties disclaim all responsibility or 
liability to any person, whether in contract, equity, tort, statute, 
or law of any kind, for any direct or indirect losses, illness or 
injury, or damage, be it general, incidental, consequential or 
punitive or any other kind of damage, relating to the use of this 
Guide. 
The information in these documents is not intended to cover 
every situation. Details which may be relevant to a user’s 
particular circumstances may have been omitted. Users 
are advised to seek professional advice before applying any 
information contained in this document to their own particular 
circumstances. Users should always obtain appropriate 
professional advice on security, legal, structural, organizational, 
personal, proprietary, public health, professional or any other 
issues involved. 
The information is presented “as is.” This Guide or any part 
thereof, including without limitation, any appendices or related 
toolkits and/or resources, is not intended in any way, and is 
hereby expressly denied, to create any relationship of any kind 
whatsoever or any duty of care between BOMA (or any of the 
persons or parties included in BOMA as defined) and any other 
person or entity including without limiting the generality of 
the foregoing any person or entity that may read, review, use 
or become aware of this guide or any part thereof (collectively 
referred to as the “user” throughout this disclaimer). The user 
also acknowledges that no such relationship is created between 
it and the parties associated with this document’s development, 
production or dissemination. The user also further 
acknowledges that this disclaimer prevents any possible duty of 
care owed by BOMA to the user from ever arising, either by rule 
of law, equity, or statute whatsoever including any obligation to 
keep this information current, validate it, ensure its accuracy, or 
update it in any way and that the use of this guide in whole or 
in part, cannot form the basis for any possible legal claims or 
proceedings whatsoever as against BOMA
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide6  Understanding the true impact of a cybersecurity 
breach
Cybersecurity threats have been continually evolving and 
becoming more aggressive and frequent. It is typically not 
a matter on whether an organization will be breached, it is 
more a matter of when the organization will be breached 
and how well prepared it is to deal with the incident.
Attacks are reported to have increased even more during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Ransomware incidents alone for 
example have increase 2.4 times year-over-year as of the 
third quarter of 2020 (Source: Marsh JLT).
In our previous guides, we explored strategies and tactics 
to plan and prepare to reduce the risk of cybersecurity 
incidents, and strengthen security posture to reduce 
the damage if an incident occurs. We also delved into 
managing one of the major sources of risk—weak links 
caused by third-party vendors embedded throughout 
an organization’s value chain. The goal behind that 
preparation is to put safeguards in place to either prevent 
or make it as difficult  as possible for hackers to gain access to your critical systems and data, avoiding or 
mitigating the impact of what can be a very severe and 
costly outcome for an organization. 
The impact that a cybersecurity breach can have on an 
organization can be very significant, and recovering from 
the attack can take a lot of time, money and resources. 
Breach impacts can range from business interruption, 
loss of customer confidence, brand and reputational 
damage, actual hard costs to respond and recover, and 
most critically, the safety of people in a building. The 
combined impacts and costs of cybersecurity incidents 
can quickly add up. 
IBM, in its Cost of a Data Breach Report 2020, has 
estimated that on average, a breach in the United States 
costs an organization US$3.86 million. Minimizing the 
impact to your organization and reducing the cost or 
loss of revenue is vital and is highly dependent upon the 
thoroughness of your response to the incident.
Consequences of a cyber incident
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide7  Having a plan: Your playbook for response and recovery
The cyber risk environment for commercial buildings 
can be high. Buildings typically store sensitive tenant 
information and are dependent on critical systems such as 
elevators, HVAC and building security that today are likely 
internet-connected. A breach could lead to safety issues 
or loss of vital tenant information, not to mention the 
possibility of compromising a building’s own operational 
data and functional capabilities.
It is important to remember that the most difficult time 
to plan a response to an incident is when it is actually 
happening. Having a plan in advance which guides your 
actions when you are hit with a breach, will expedite 
dealing with the breach and mitigate its impact. 
In our previous guides, we have discussed building a 
plan in detail, working with third-party vendors and 
securing your supply chain, all with the intent of reducing 
the likelihood of a cybersecurity incident, and being 
prepared to minimize damage if you are breached. While 
we recommend reading our other guides to be better 
prepared, some quick pointers from the previous guides 
are provided below:
 •Know which systems are connected to the Internet, 
who has access and how access is secured.
 •Have protocols in place for procuring and onboarding 
new technology.
 •Provide an ongoing cybersecurity training program 
to all levels across the organizatio At a minimum, 
standard cyber-hygiene training can be a critical factor 
in reducing breaches, and in identifying them quickly if 
one does occur.
 •Identify third-party risk levels, and work with your 
vendors on cybersecurity practices, including building 
key elements into your contracts and procurement.
 •Build a response team that includes both internal 
and external experts, including those that specialize 
in cybersecurity, who will come together to deal with 
a breach – this team should be ready to mobilize 
immediately, don’t wait for an incident to assemble 
your response team •Have an incident command structure with clear roles 
and responsibilities, including your leadership team 
or corporate office for key decision making and your 
onsite team for executing tactical, property level tasks.
 •Consider getting the right cybersecurity insurance and 
fully understand what your insurance provider can 
contribute in the even of a breach.
 •Test your plan through tabletop exercises, planning 
responses for different types of breaches and helping 
team members understand their roles.
 •Keep your plan current as the threat landscape 
evolves.
You can read further on building your playbook in our 
previous guides:
1. Addressing cyber risks in commercial real estate 
building operations
2. Embedding cybersecurity in procurement 
3. The role of Supplier Relationship Management (SRM) 
in cybersecurity

2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide8  If you have been breached: Lifecycle of your response  
Have you been breached? 
 
There are some obvious signs of unauthorized breach of 
systems that building owners and managers can look out 
for. 
Some more obvious signs include:
 •Encrypted files appearing on corporate file shares
 •Employees unable to access applications to perform 
daily tasks 
 •System operators being unable to access operational 
systems
 •Ransomware notes being printed out on office printers 
or appearing on user screens
 •Complete systems have been rendered inactive or not 
available such as access systems, lighting, escalators, 
or climate controls
 •Reports of confidential information belonging to the 
organization made available on the Internet •Reports from suppliers, customers, or partners not 
receiving their expected goods, payment, or services 
 •Defacement or takeover of corporate websites 
and other social media services such as Twitter or 
Facebook
Other indicators are more subtle and harder to detect 
immediately. Here is what they could look like:
 •Seeing increasing delayed responses from normally 
respondent systems
 •Usually reliable operational systems breaking down 
more often 
 •Increase in replacement of failed parts or systems for 
no apparent reason other than overuse
 •Abnormal network activity and increased Internet 
traffic
 •Sudden or inexplicable revenue loss on fee-based 
systems such as parking or facility usage meters 1. Detect and report

2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide9   •The statistics from systems being inconsistent when 
compared with manual human sampling 
Quite often the actual breach of systems happens long 
before some of the more obvious signs of the breach 
appear. If you observe any signs, obvious or subtle, it’s 
important to act immediately to confirm the cybersecurity 
incident. Then, the response process and steps that are 
outlined in the next section can serve as a guide for you.
 
Remain calm  
Dealing with the situation demands a calm approach. 
You are not alone, and every organization has—or will—
experience any number of cyber incidents. It is how the 
organization deals with each incident that will either 
safeguard or jeopardize its reputation with customers. 
With a level head and deliberate actions, first triage the 
situation. Quite often, you may not immediately know 
the full extent of the incident, so it’s important to first 
mobilize your response team, involve your internal IT and 
operational technology (OT) resources, and engage an 
expert cybersecurity response advisor. If you do not have 
internal cyber response expertise, it is important to have 
an expert on standby rather than waiting for an incident to 
source this expertise.
Establish roles and responsibilities
Every single person as part of the organization has a 
key role to fulfill even if it is to remain calm, leave the 
premises, and not to communicate anything to anyone. 
Even if you have an IT and/or OT department, they will 
be instrumental in your response but all levels of the 
organization will play a part in your response.
Before an incident, everyone from the Owner/Operator, 
Board Chair and CEO/President, to the administrative 
staff should know their responsibilities and roles for any 
cyber incident. These can be developed and matured 
within a cybersecurity incident response plan. In the 
absence of a specific cyber incident response plan, 
you may not necessarily have to reinvent the wheel, 
by ensuring that your response aligns with an existing 
disaster recovery or business continuity plan, if you have 
one. 
The key is to have a coordinated plan based on already established roles, and a plan that engages both 
appropriate internal resources and external expertise. 
These should ideally be people who understand your 
systems, have the expertise to address and respond to 
the various aspects of a cyber attack, and are ready to 
respond immediately as needed. 
Workstreams to deal with a breach
There are several accepted frameworks when dealing with an incident, 
with each referring to the same overlapping workstreams. Regardless of 
the specific wording in different frameworks, each incident contains the 
following workstreams.
Visibility and Containment: This team works on getting as much 
visibility with each system and device to determine the extent of the 
incident, and once known, works to contain the issue through various 
means such as disabling access or the Internet, or moving the system 
offline.
Root Cause Investigation: This team focuses solely on investigating how 
the threat actor was able to breach the organization’s system. This may 
include forensics.
Remediation: This team has the onerous and arduous actions of 
restoring the systems, ensuring that additional security protocols are in 
place, testing, and bringing each system back online.
Resilience: This is a growing but critically important workstream that 
must be built, given the number of legal cases and class action lawsuits 
brought forth today. This team builds the archives of all evidence, 
actions, and results, to ensure that it can be replayed to address any 
future claims.
 
Engage your cyber insurance provider
If your organization is covered by cyber insurance, refer 
to the policy for incident reporting requirements, and 
look to access assistance on cyber incident response, and 
cyber crisis communication. 
Understanding incident reporting and approval 
requirement under your cyber insurance is an important 
step and should be understood prior to an incident. In 
order for the insurance policy to provide coverage, insurer 
consent and approval is required for all costs incurred 
in managing a cyber incident. For example, investigating 
an active threat or malware in your systems requires 
engaging external security forensic investigators. It is 
important to understand if the external firm has been 
approved by the insurer or what pre-approved external 2. Plan and respond
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide10  firms are available to engage. Another example is that 
insurer consent is needed prior to payment of ransom 
demand or a breach coach (privacy lawyer).
In Appendix A, we have included some additional 
information on what cyber coverage typically includes, 
and what underwriters may be looking for.
Understand the nature and intent of the breach 
In trying to understand where to look first, it’s important 
to be aware of what the most common aspects to look 
for are, so you can start with a focused approach. As 
per IBM’s Cost of a Data Breach Report 2020, there 
are typically three main causes of a  breach for an 
organization: 23% can be attributed to human error, 25% 
is due to a system glitch, and with no surprise, deliberate, 
malicious cyberattacks are responsible for 52% of 
surveyed data breaches.
Of these malicious attacks, the most common methods 
include:
 •Compromised credentials: Bad/weak passwords, or 
passwords already available from previous breaches 
– 19%
 •Cloud misconfiguration: Examples include weak 
Office365 or Amazon Web Services security control 
implementations – 19%
 •Vulnerable third-party software: Examples include the 
recent Solarwinds Orion software vulnerability – 16%
 •Phishing – 14%
 •Physical Security Compromise – 10%
 •Malicious or Disgruntled Insider – 7%
 •Social Engineering – 8%
By far, the goal of threat actors is to first exfiltrate 
customers’ personally identifiable information (PII) with 
the second goal being getting intellectual property (IP).
With any breach, a sophisticated threat actor or hacker 
will focus on the following goals:
 •Obtain unauthorized access to as many systems as 
possible   •Increase their level of access to as many systems as 
possible, and gain administrative rights or privileges
 •Remove the ability for any other users to access these 
same systems
 •Install additional access methods to increase their 
ability to re-enter the systems as long as possible 
 •Exfiltrate as much sensitive data as possible 
 •Encrypt the data and any available backups 
 •Render critical infrastructure (CI), Operational 
Technology (OT), Industrial Control Systems (ICS) 
inoperable 
Once some or all the above goals are met, the threat 
actors then focus on monetizing their gains by 
implementing the usual ransomware methods. Other 
threat actors may focus less on the ransomware 
aspect, but intentionally use social media to damage 
the reputation of the organization or to make political, 
religious, or environmental statements. Keep in mind 
that it is possible to have employees or vendors infiltrate 
systems deliberately, and you could be facing a breach 
orchestrated by a trusted individual who knows the 
systems.
It is important to try and understand the motives of 
the hacker and what they may be seeking, so you can 
prioritize where you look and how you block access. 
Isolating or moving systems offline may be required based 
on what you find. 
Identify the severity of the breach
The building management, or your head office IT/OT 
if applicable, needs to have a risk-based approach in 
categorizing the level of the breach. One type of breach 
deemed critical to one organization is not always the 
same for another. It would depend on where the most 
critical information and safety of your building lie. 
However, commonly acceptable groupings include:
Critical: Where the safety of people is at risk, either 
through inaccessible elevators, building management 
systems, access card systems or others.
High Severity: Where sensitive data is deliberately 
exfiltrated, or access is granted to unauthorized systems.
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide11  Medium Severity: Where data may be encrypted and 
statistical data is available to unauthorized users.
Low Severity: Examples include web site defacement or 
parking access mechanisms that have been bypassed.
The severity may decide who you bring in and what 
actions you take first. For example, if life safety is at 
risk, you must act immediately to ensure the safety of 
your employees and tenants, and bring in the necessary 
professionals or public emergency services.
Engage external professionals
To contain the situation and minimize its impact on your 
building or organization, it is advisable to call in experts 
who deal with cybersecurity breaches on a regular basis. 
They typically know what to look for, how to prioritize and 
respond based on the type of breach and can apply the 
latest industry practices. 
Professionals may include those in the fields of 
cybersecurity, legal, forensics, physical security in 
cases of life safety, and insurance and communications/
public relations. It is recommended that you have these 
individuals identified and have pre-negotiated service 
level agreements (SLAs) as part of your pre-developed 
cyber response plan.Establish the ‘war room’
There needs to be a central repository of actions and 
information exchange along with a platform for discussion 
and exchange of ideas and critical updates. During the 
COVID-19 pandemic, these have now typically become 
24/7 virtual chat rooms where each reporting party 
gives their updates. It is important for an organization to 
ensure these are available at a moment’s notice and not 
dependent on the existing corporate infrastructure in case 
it is compromised.
Establish communication protocols
What needs to be communicated, to whom, and when, 
are all critical aspects of dealing with a crisis such as 
this. Building this protocol based on your building or 
organization’s situation is critical, as is ensuring that all 
the people and parties working on the response team 
understand the protocol too.
The important role of logs and backups in dealing 
with a breach 
Often, when you ask a cybersecurity response expert what the one thing that an organization must 
do to deal with an incident is, they will say it is usually the logs and backups. While preparation and 
practice are obvious candidates, from a technical perspective, it is the logs and backups that can help 
save an organization’s reputation.  
Optimized logs from multiple systems can quickly facilitate the investigation and provide a critical 
record of what the threat actor’s actions were to build the defensibility of the incident. The absence of 
logs forces the organization to accept the worst case scenario and therefore increases the effort and 
resources required to remediate.
Backups—especially clean, valid ones—have saved organizations a significant amount of money and 
work when it comes to dealing with cybersecurity incidents.
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide12  Once the immediate situation has been dealt with, it is 
time for the organization to focus on recovery.
Understand full extent of the attack
After dealing with the urgent aspects of the response, it is 
important to analyze and build a thorough inventory of all 
the systems and information that was affected. This will 
help in identifying improvement opportunities.
Build and implement a recovery plan
Once the inventory has been built, recovery and 
remediation should be ensured for each system and asset. 
It is best to check and double check that everything is 
now secure, backed up and fully recovered.
Improve security monitoring and controls
Whatever caused the breach, or allowed it to affect more 
systems, would have been identified during the response 
investigation. Review the monitoring and controls that 
allowed the lapse and fortify them if needed.
The human element
Through a crisis, there is always a human element that 
suffers. Often, the person or people who unwittingly were 
initially breached may need support. Whether there was 
a lapse, their account was hacked or their laptop stolen, 
the building management should have a plan to reassure 
the victim that today, the sophistication of these attacks 
fools the most knowledgeable of people. Some of the best 
handled incidents ensure that all staff and responders 
feel fully supported by the organization.
The IT/OT resources and response team typically work 
long and difficult hours during a crisis such as this. Any 
critical incident may take weeks to contain, months to 
remediate, and years to recover. Management typically 
communicates with stakeholders, regulators, and tenants 
to provide assurances. However, it’s also important to 
ensure the wellbeing of employees who worked through 
the crisis, and remind them to rest, organize replacement 
shifts for them, provide food and transportation support, 
and bring in mental health support workers if needed. Informing external authorities or agencies
In the aftermath of a cybersecurity incident, you face 
a decision on whether to inform external agencies or 
authorities. Often, there is hesitancy in informing the 
police of a cybercrime, unlike other crimes that have 
taken place, in part due to how cybersecurity breaches 
have come to be viewed. It is important to consult legal 
counsel and also verify whether there is any obligation or 
requirement to inform authorities in your jurisdiction.
There may not be an obligation to inform authorities, 
unless any external parties’ information was accessed 
or there is any threat to physical security. Then the 
decision rests with the management and leadership of 
your organization, in consultation with cybersecurity 
experts and legal counsel. While it may not be necessary 
to inform or share information with the police or any 
external agency, there may be some value in sharing 
it with national cybersecurity agencies, giving only the 
information you are comfortable with, so that collectively, 
more knowledge is shared and gained. One such agency is 
the Canadian Cyber Threat Exchange (CCTX).
Keep in mind that there is always risk to your brand and 
reputation, and a potential of liability with any failure to 
communicate a cyberthreat that could reasonably have 
been foreseen to cause harm or damage to third parties, 
especially the public.
 
Debriefing is a critical component in bolstering your 
building for the long term. It may be a matter of time 
before someone tries to breach your building or systems 
again. The learnings you embed and the gaps you bridge 
will help you come out on top of future attacks.
Understanding the root cause
Once the incident has been dealt with, it is important to 
get deeper into understanding the root cause. Earlier, you 
would have detected what systems were breached, and 
by now you would have recovered those systems. During 
the debrief phase, it is important to understand what 
systems and processes in your own organization may 
have reduced the risk of the incident. Was it inadequate 3. Recover
4. Debrief
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide13  training, third-party risk management, password 
protocols, cybersecurity built into systems or something 
else entirely? It could be a combination of multiple things 
too. Identifying weak links will help you know what to 
strengthen.
Identify the true losses from the incident
The losses from the incident may not just be the 
immediate costs that you can identify. They may be more 
indirect, such as lack of trust or eventual move of a 
tenant. Identifying and understanding the deeper picture 
may be critical in helping you determine the true loss you 
incurred.
Develop and execute an investment plan
Based on what you uncover while analyzing the root 
cause, building or strengthening your investment plan 
for cybersecurity operations and awareness may be 
necessary. Identify the weaker areas, prioritize gaps 
based on criticality and then plan your investment in ways 
that will help you the most.
Revise and build your cybersecurity plan 
If you didn’t have a cybersecurity plan before you 
were breached, it is time to create one now based 
on your learnings. If you already had a plan, revising 
it and changing it based on your learnings is highly 
recommended. Cybersecurity threats are constantly 
evolving, and your plan must too.
Establishing a culture of cybersecurity—from training to 
regular communication
Today, it’s essential for an organization to live and breathe 
cybersecurity and make it common for staff to think of 
cybersecurity risks in all the work they undertake. That 
can bolster the building’s defence and leave far less room 
for errors and oversight that lead to a breach or let it 
go unchecked. Regular training and communication is 
essential in building a culture that will protect you on a 
sustained basis. Conclusion
Cybersecurity threats are evolving at a rapid pace and 
becoming more targeted and adept at finding gaps. Having 
a robust cybersecurity plan for your buildings is critical 
and must evolve with the threats. It is important to think 
of your cybersecurity approach as a marathon, that needs 
to keep moving and evolving, rather than a sprint that 
ends soon and is a one-time exercise.
Having a well-prepared team that you can bring together 
very quickly when needed is critical in controlling and 
managing your risks. If you have been breached, once 
you have dealt with the immediate response and started 
on a path of recovery, debriefing and strengthening your 
cybersecurity plans and systems is critical.

2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide14  Appendix A: What underwriters are looking for – 12 key 
controls
While these 12 controls are essentially what underwriters may be looking for, centralized risk management and 
insurance would also benefit from these controls. For real estate organizations where the operations may include 
property management or building management systems, a centralized risk management structure needs to be 
demonstrated. 
It is typical to have multiple entities responsible for management of specific services or operations, however when 
it comes to data privacy or information security, one group or stakeholder needs to create a cohesive cybersecurity 
framework. A fragmented approach and not having a clear line of reporting is viewed negatively from an underwriting 
perspective.
1. MFA-controlled access  
There are 15 billion stolen credentials on the dark web – 
a 300% increase since 2018*. Multi-factor Authentication 
(MFA) prevents attackers from effectively using them 
without this additional factor. Remote working has put 
MFA at the forefront to secure access to critical systems 
and sensitive data.
2. Secured and tested backups
Attackers are looking to delete backups prior to launching 
a ransomware attack launch so they can successfully 
cripple and extort their victims. It is essential to secure 
backups through encryption and isolation from the 
network (offline or MFA-controlled access), as well as 
regularly test backups and recovery plans.
3. Managed vulnerabilities
Regular vulnerability scans and annual penetration 
testing simulate cyber attacks on the network. 
Such actions allow organization to uncover existing 
vulnerabilities and remediate before threat actors have a 
chance to exploit them.
4. Filtered emails and web content
Malicious links and files are still the primary way to insert 
ransomware, steal passwords, and eventually access 
critical systems. Today’s first line of defense includes 
indispensable technologies to filter incoming emails, block 
malicious sites or downloads, and test suspicious content 
in a secure “sandbox" environment.
 5. Patched systems and applications
Unpatched vulnerabilities remain a leading cause of 
intrusions into systems. Hundreds of vulnerabilities 
are revealed every month for multiple applications and 
systems. When technology environments are not patched 
in a timely fashion, attackers will seek to exploit their 
vulnerabilities.
6. Protected privileged accounts
Privileged accounts are the keys of a network. When 
attackers compromise these accounts, the likelihood of 
causing significant harm is extremely high. Limiting the 
number of privileged accounts, using strong password 
security practices/vaults, MFA, and monitoring these 
accounts is critical to network security. 
7. Prepared and tested incident response plans
An up-to-date incident response plan with a trained 
team provides efficiency, speed, and quality in response 
to cyber incidents. When combined with backups and 
business continuity plans, it significantly helps to mitigate 
the impacts on operations and your organization’s 
reputation, thereby limiting overall costs.
8. Protected network
All breached organizations used firewalls to protect their 
networks - but the technology is often underutilized or 
outdated. Now is the time to ensure efficient firewall and 
other technologies are in place with well defined rules; 
leverage network segmentation, intrusion detection and 
prevention systems, data leak prevention systems, etc.(Courtesy: Marsh JLT Specialty)
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide15  9. Secured endpoints
Advanced anti-malware solutions on workstations, 
servers, and mobile devices detect malicious programs 
and contain their spread. Technology allows organizations 
to remotely respond to attacks and even prevent data 
leakage. The time when simple anti-virus was good 
enough is behind us.
10. Phishing-aware workforce
Recently, attackers took advantage of COVID-19 as 
a guise to spread ransomware. There will always be 
environmental factors that attackers can exploit to 
deceive people. Training and phishing campaigns help 
ensure people remain aware and vigilant. 11. Logged and monitored network
Logging and monitoring network activities allows 
organization to identify something possibly harmful might 
be happening. And attackers actions can be detected 
and contained at an early stage. Automated technology 
combined with operators monitoring is needed to watch 
network events or anomalous behavior of users.
12. Hardened device configuration
Attackers exploit default device settings or 
misconfigurations. Defining security baselines to harden 
devices, continuously managing secure configurations 
and change control processes is essential to preventing 
attackers from reaching their target. 

2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide16  First-party cover  
First-party insurance coverage: 
Direct loss and out of pocket 
expense incurred by insuredDescription Covered Costs
Business Income/Extra 
ExpenseInterruption or suspension 
of computer systems due to 
a network security breach. 
Coverage may be added to include 
system failure and can extend to 
contingent businesses. •Loss of Income
 •Costs in excess of normal operating expenses 
required to restore systems
 •Dependent business interruption
 •Forensic expenses
Data Asset Protection Costs to restore, recreate, or 
recollect your data and other 
intangible assets that are 
corrupted or destroyed. •Restoration of corrupted data
 •Vendor costs to recreate lost data
Event Management/
Breach ResponseCosts resulting from a network 
security or privacy breach. •Forensics
 •Notification
 •Credit Monitoring
 •Call Center
 •Public Relations
Cyber Extortion Network or data compromised if 
ransom not paid. •Forensics
 •Investigation
 •Negotiations and payments of ransoms 
demandedAppendix B: Understanding cyber insurance
Cyber coverage parts
First-party coverages(Courtesy: Marsh JLT Specialty)
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide17  Third-party cover  
Third-party insurance coverage: 
Defense and  liability incurred due 
to alleged harm caused to others by 
the insured.Description Covered Costs
Privacy Liability Failure to prevent unauthorized 
access, disclosure or collection, or 
failure of others to whom you have 
entrusted such information, for 
not properly notifying of a privacy 
breach.  •Liability and defense
 •Bank lawsuits
 •Consumer lawsuits
Network Security 
Liability Failure of system security to 
prevent or mitigate a computer 
attack. Failure of system security 
includes failure of written policies 
and procedures addressing 
technology use. •Liability and defense
Privacy Regulatory 
Defense Costs & PCI 
Fines & PenaltiesPrivacy breach and related fines or 
penalties assessed by Regulators. •Liability and defense
 •Investigation by a regulator
 •Prep costs to testify before regulators
 •PCI / PHI fines and penalties
Media Liability Defense and liability for, 
including but not limited to, libel, 
slander, product disparagement, 
misappropriation of name or 
likeness, plagiarism, copyright 
infringement, etc. •Liability and defenseAppendix B: Understanding cyber insurance
Cyber coverage parts
Third-party coverages(Courtesy: Marsh JLT Specialty)
2022  BOMA Cyber Incident Response Guide18  Aknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support of MNP LLP, First Capital Real Estate Investment Trust, QuadReal Property 
Group, Canderel Inc. and the expertise provided by MNP LLP.
Our contributors, who shared their insight and spent valuable time on this guide:
Stephen Adams  
General Manager  
Cushman Wakefield Asset Service ULC
Maria Andonovsky  
Director, Operational Excellence  
BentallGreenOak
Trent Bester  
Senior Vice President, Consulting and Public Sector  
MNP
John Chung  
Vice President, Portfolio Technology  
Quadreal Property Group
Trevor Cleveland  
Director, Operations Risk Management  
Colliers International
Ken Cowan  
Vice President, Risk and National Programs  
Morguard Investments Limited
Nada Ebeid  
Business Development Manager – Canada  
Genetec
Sam Flis  
Director, Property Technology  
BentallGreenOak
Sue Klinner  
Vice President, Business Process and Risk Management  
First Capital
Victor Lauer-Martin  
Architecte, Sécurité de l’information, Technologies de 
l'information  
Ivanhoe Cambridge
Kendall Peart  
Managing Director, Real Estate  
Marsh Canada Limited
Ruby Rai  
Cyber Practice Leader  
Marsh Canada Limited
Bob Riddell  
President and Founding Advisor  
Riddell Risk Management IncDavid Sulston  
Director, Security  
Oxford Properties Group
Nada Sutic  
Director, Programs and Procurement  
QuadReal Property Group
Martine Theriault  
Vice-President of Property Management, Montreal & 
Ottawa  
Canderel
Lee Thiessen  
National Leader, Real Estate and Construction  
MNP
Naveli Thomas  
Director  
Nyox
BOMA Canada team:
Benjamin Shinewald  
President & CEO  
BOMA Canada