Updated April 30, 2020   
 
 
 
Business Continuity  
Planning Guidelines  
for School Districts  &  
Independent School Auth orities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Business Continuity Management Program  
Ministry of Education , British Columbia   
 

 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  2 Overview  
 
 Introduction  
3 What is a Business Continuity Plan  (BCP)  
4 What should be included in an organization’s  BCP  
5 These guidelines are provided to support resilience during COVID -19 
6 Incorporate strategies from the Integrated Planning Framework (IPF)  
7 How to use these guidelines to develop a BCP  
8 Coordinatio n is required to develop and implement a BCP  
  
 Determine Priorities  
9 The BCP  focuses  planning  efforts  on “critical  services ” 
9 Department staff will outline  services required during COVID -19 
10 Each service will be assigned  a Recovery Time Objective  (RTO)  
11 Priorities should  be approved by departments and the organization  
  
 Document Services  
12 Once priorities are approved, create supporting documentation  
13 Define a required minimum level for each service  
13 Document recovery procedures and considerations  
13 Document  operating  requirements  and interdependencies  
14 An example may be provided to support consistent documentation  
15 Plans should  be reviewed by BCP leads for completeness  
  
 Develop Strategies  
16 Develop continuity strategie s for the organization  
17 Select strategies  based on their cost and suitability  
17 Acquire tools and form agreements to enable strategie s 
  
 Prepare  for Activations  
18 Develop a Communications Plan to ensure coordination during activation  
19 Provide Training and Awareness for all staff  
20 Conduct Tabletop Exercises for the plan to identify gaps and increase staff readiness  
  
 Activations & Resources  
21 Additional planning  and implementation  resources  will be provided  
22 Glossary of terms used in this document and associated templates  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  3 Introduction  
What is a Business Continuity Plan (BCP)  
A Business Continuity Plan (BCP) outline s how critical  services  will be performed   
when a business disruption  prevents  business -as-usual . 
 
Critical Services  Serv ices that, if not performed, may result in  unacceptable  outcome s. 
Business disruption  Operating requirements become  unavailable  to one or more services.  
Business -as-usual  Standard  proce dures  for performing services.  
 
BCPs safeguard critical services, wh ich mitigates risks (safety, assets, liabilities), and enables an 
organization to take control of a situation and resume services during a business disruption.  
 
\ 
 
 
 
 
Business Continuity Plans provide information and strategies to resume services using a lternative 
procedures or resources.  The BCP acts  as a roadmap  after a business disruption by identifying 
priorities and outlining  how, who, and what is required to restore  critical services.  
 
It is significantly easier to prepare continuity options befor e a business disruption occurs. During a 
business disruption, key staff may be unavailable, and it may not be possible to acquire the 
resources required to overcome a business disruption in a timely manner.   
A business disruption may be limited to a single service or impact the whole organization.  
• Loss  of staff – employees required knowledge or capacity are unavail able.  
• Loss of technology – specific tool or computer application are unavailable.  
• Loss of dependency – specific services providers (internal or external) are unavailable.  
• Loss of worksite – required worksite and co -located resources are unavailable.  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  4 What should be included in an organization’s  BCP  
A Business Continuity Plan enables an effective and timely  response to business disruption s: 
1. What services  must be performed?  ✓ What level of service is req uired?  
✓ When  do the services need to be performed ? 
✓ What impacts  must be avoided?  
2. How  are those servi ces performed?  ✓ What resources  are required  to perform services ? 
✓ What strategies  are available to support recovery ? 
✓ Who  is required to perform those services?  
3. How  will the plan be implemented?  ✓ Who is responsible  for implementing the plan?  
✓ How will commun ications  occur?  
✓ What happens after  the plan is implemented?  
 
 
Below is a table of contents for a BCP:  
 
SECTION 1: OVERVIEW  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  4 
SECTION 2: EVENT RESPONSE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  8 
SECTION 3: DEPARTMENT  PLANS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 12 
SECTION 4: CONTINUITY STRATEGIES  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  24 
APPENDIX A – CONTACT LISTS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  27 
APPENDIX B – INITIAL RESPONSE PHASE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..................  31 
APPENDIX C – ACTIVATION PHASE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  32 
APPENDIX D – OPERATIONAL PHASE  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........................  35 
APPENDIX E – DEACTIVATION PHASE  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........................  37 
APPENDIX F – BUSINESS CONTINUITY FORMS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 41 
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  5 These guidelines are provided to support resilience during COVID -19 
These guidelines and templates are designed  to support school districts  and independent school 
authorities  that do not yet have a robust Business Continuity Plan . As a result of following these 
guidelines  and templates,  school districts /authorities  will have a BCP that is streamlined to 
document crit ical services  to ensure their availability, a nd capacity to overcome unexpected 
challenges, during the COVID -19 pandemic.  
 
Business Impact Analysis (BIA)  templates will assist staff to  identify  and document  information 
required to plan for an event . As a r esult, critical services will be identified.  
 
Business Continuity Plan (BCP)  templates will assist the organization to document and prepare 
response activities before an event occurs. As a result, services will be documented.  
 
To continue planning for COVI D-19, BCP Strategies (see Develop  Strategies ) should be specific to 
mitigating relevant risks, such as temporary loss of staff or worksite. As your BCP outlines 
procedures for delivering all critical services, additional organization -wide strategies can be  
developed and implemented to sup port cross -training and resources for alternate staff.  
 
Templates :  
Business Impact Analysis (BIA)  
Business Continuity Plan (BCP) – Section 3 Department  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page will be updated with additional templates to support planning.  
Additional templates and BCP documentation will be linked on this page to support plan 
development, preparedness, and imple mentation. This document may have been  updated  
since the date listed in the  footer  - if this document was not recently downloaded, please 
download t he latest version of  the Busin ess Continuity Planning Guidelines . 
 
 
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  6 Incorporate strategies from the Integrated Planning Framework  (IPF)  
These guidelines prescribe a generic process for planning for busi ness disruptions. Although this 
process is streamlined for services required during COVID -19, it should be assumed  that additional 
services (beyond those outlined in the IPF) will be identified during the BIA  process.  
This document supplements, but does no t substitute for, direction provided in the Integrated 
Planning  Framework  (IPF) and Continuity of Learning Planning Guide for Teachers . 
 
Services  outlined  in the IPF can  be incorporated in your BCP by ensuring:  
• IPF services and the ir interdependencies are identified as  “critical services”   
• New processes for IPF services are incorporated in your BCP’s critical service procedures  
• Organization -wide strategies to support remote work are documented as BCP strategies  
 
 
 
 
  Refer to the Inte grated Planning Framework  for program -specific strategies.  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  7 How to use these guidelines to develop a BCP  
Followi ng these guidelines as a checklist will result in a plan  for all critical services in each 
department , general continuity  strategies , and a proces s to implement and manage priorities.  
 
Legend  □ Action  
• Consideration  
 
This process  seeks  to identify, document,  strategize, and prepare for business disruptions.  
 
Business Continuity Planning can be  constrained by several factors:  
Risk  Mitigation  
• Lack of buy -in from program area staff . □ Assign senior  lead to establish priority.  
• Inadequate assessment or planning.  □ Provide general  awareness for all staff . 
• Planning is limited to a single program  area.  □ Designate a “BCP coordinator” to manage and 
support  the overall planning process.  
• Delays, duplication  and inefficiencies . □ Designate “BCP Leads” for departments and lin es 
of service to coordinate staff  planning.  
 
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  8 Coordination is required to develop and implement a BCP  
All contributing staff are responsible for their part of the BCP. When activated, the BCP supports 
the organization to continue service – despite advers e and limiting conditions.   
A top -down management structure is required to coordinate the development of a BCP . 
 
 Executive Lead  
□ Champion the BCP – why do we need it, what are staff roles, planning timelines  
□ Communicate roles/responsibilities to all staff  supports increases participation.  
□ Assign planning roles and responsibilities to staff  
□ Approve timelines for assignments  
□ Approve priorities after the assessment occurs  
□ Approve strategies and risk mitigations  
□ During implementation, priorities may be fluid; decision making system required to 
coordinate activities and recovery, to meet objectives and reduce impact  
 
BCP Coordinator  
□ Report to the Executive Lead  and provide regular u pdates  
□ Develop , implement and monitor a project plan to develop the organization ’s BCP  
□ Develop/distribute planning assignments to Department BCP leads  
□ Roll-up priorities and BCP documentation from Department BCP leads  
□ Identify key risks and support the org anization to develop continuity strategies  
□ Develop training materials that can b e circulated to all staff  
□ Develop exercise materials for Department and Service BCP Leads  
 
Department BCP Leads  
□ Complete tasks assigned by BCP Coordinator  
□ Assign planning task s to program areas with critical services  
□ Roll-up priorities and BCP documentati on from Service BCP leads  
 
Program Area BCP Leads  
□ Complete tasks assigned by your Department BCP Lead  
□ Assign critical service staff to outline procedures and requirements  
□ Complete exercise assignments, when assigned by the Department BCP lead  
  
 In order for a BCP to enable the organization to successfully overcome an unexpected 
business disruption to any critical service , all departments must contribute to the plan.  

 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  9 Determine  Priorities  
The BCP focuses planning efforts on “critical services”  
• To determine priorities, an assessment of all services is required  
• Staff will be assigned to identify and assess the disruption impact for their services  
• Identify services that ar e operati ng, or may be required, during the pandemic only  
•  “Critical services” are services that must be recovered within 15 days of a disruption  
• Review and sign -off/approval of RTOs is  required by Department and Executive leads  
Department staff will outl ine servi ces required during COVID -19 
Using the BIA template , staff will identify  all services r equired d uring COVID -19: 
□ The BCP Coordinator should oversee the organization’s BIA process  
□ Circulate the BIA template (or a SharePoint version) to each Department BCP lead  
□ Request Department BCP leads assign staff to complete the BIA template  
□ Only list department s ervices that are or may be required during COVID -19 
 
Business Impact Analysis (BIA) template:  
 
Term  Description  Example  
Business Function  Program  Area of a Department  Financial Services  
Sub-Function  A service  that the Program Area provides  Payroll  
Supp orting Process  A description of how the service is performed  Timesheets  are 
entered /approved  
Impact Description  What might happen if the delay were longer?  Staff pay may be  
delayed  
Time Sensitivity  Would impact s only occur at certain times?  1st/3rd Tuesd ay 
Recovery Time Objective  
(RTO)  How many days can the service be delayed?  2 business days  

 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  10 Each service will be assigned  a Recovery Time Objective  (RTO)  
Recovery Time Objective: The amount of time that a service can be delayed  
before a n unacceptable outcome may  occur.  
 
Recovery Time Objectives  
 
Examples of impacts resulting from business disruptions  for up to 15 days:  
 
• “Recovery Time Objective” is when a service must be resumed to prevent major impacts  
• Potential impacts range from life -safety to mild in convenience.  
• What kind of impacts the BCP will mitigate should be communicated to staff.  
• Establishing a threshold for planning (eg. 15 days) determines what services to plan for  
• All services, including low priority (e.g. 30 days RTO) must be identified/ass essed  
□ Executive and department leads define criteria for “unacceptable” impacts.  
□ Program Area BCP leads will assign staff to list services required during COVID -19. 
□ Staff will de scribe “unacceptable” impacts of not performing the function for 15 days.  
□ Staff will also assign an RTO  – as a maximum allowable downtime – for each service.  
□ Staff should request assistance during the BIA process if they are unclear of the process.  
  

 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  11 Prior ities should  be approved by departments and the organization  
• A sign-off proces s ensures priorities are centrally organized and directed   
• During sign -off, critically consider whether impacts are/not acceptable.  
• Unacceptable impacts should be mitigated by an appropriate RTO.  
• The BCP Coordinator will support the sign -off and transitio n to developing plans  
□ Department BCP will review/approved B IA results before returning them  
□ BCP Coordinator will combined BIA results for review/approval by the Executive Lead  
□ BCP Coordinator will roll -up services that have an RTO of up to 15 days  (critica l services)  
 
Business Impact Analysis  
✓ Services reflect  to individual functions of the Program  Area  
✓ Description (Supporting Process) and Time Sensitivity  
✓ Impact Description  
✓ RTO reflects th e organization’s tolerance for the Impact Description  
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  12 Document Se rvices  
Once priorities are approved, create supp orting documentation  
• Departments will complete  a BCP S ection 3 Department  template  
□ BCP Coordinator will provide a list of approved priorities to each Department BCP lead  
□ BCP Coordinator will provide a BCP S ection 3 template  to D epartment BCP leads  
□ Department BCP leads will assign priorities and a template to Program  Area BCP leads  
□ Program  Area BCP leads will task appropriate staff to complete  template  documentation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  13 Define a required minimum level for e ach service  
□ Staff should describe the re quired level of service (e.g. “emergency requests only”  
• To avoid the impact, only a “reduced level of service” may be required  
• In some cases, a “regular level of service” may be required to avoid the impact  
 
 
Documen t recovery procedures and key considerations  
□ Staff will document the procedure to perform the service  
□ Staff may be able to propose an alternate procedure  
□ Staff may advise additional considerations when recovering this service  
• Procedures should provide adeq uate detail; they may be implemented by other staff  
• Procedures may identify additional resource requirements  
• Singe points of failure are steps in a process that do not have work -arounds  
 
 
Document  operating  requirements and interdependencies  
□ For each servi ce, staff completing docu mentation will list resource  requirements  
□ Staff (names and positions)  
□ Worksite  
□ Workspace Type  
□ Connectivity  
□ Technology (hardware/software)  
□ Databases  
□ Vital Records, Procedure Manuals, or Other Documents…  
□ Other equipment  
□ Internal de pendencies  
□ External dependencies  
□ If known , staff should identify alternatives, redu cing future planning  needs   
 
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  14 An example may be provided to support consistent documentation  
Below is an example of documentation for a critical service  
  
5 days  Provi de new/replacement computers to staff  
Always  Workstation  Administration  IT Department  
SERVICE DESCRIPTION  
Monitor  for requests , configure and issue new workstations to staff 
IMPACT DESCRIPTION  
Staff are unable to perform  their job duties  resulting in  subsequent delays  
MINIMUM LEV EL OF SERVICE  
Normal level of service  
PROCEDURE  
1. Moni tor for  requests by email ; Respond to confirm receipt of request  
2. If replacement, provide instructions for receiving  the previous computer  
3. Assign work station ID to staff member and department using the  tracking sheet  
4. If required, con figure an email/user account in the Windows Serve r database  
5. Notify the staff member when the  workstation  is ready for pick -up 
RECOVERY CONSIDERATIONS  
• Major expenses  require Director of Finance a pproval  
• Contin gency budget for leases  is available  without approval  
• Ensure at least 20 workstations are available for depl oyment at all times  
• Leasing orders are placed in units of 10 ; orders take 2-3 weeks  to fulfill  
RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS  
 Primary /Requirement  Alternate /Work around  
Staff  John Doe , IT Administrator  Dave Hall , IT Manager  
Worksite  123 Street Av  456 W est Rd. 
Workspace  IT Support Room  Classroom  
Connectivity  Email, Phone, LAN  Phone 
Technology  Windows Laptop  Smart phone  
Databases  Windows Server   
Documents   None   
Other Workstation T oolkit   
INTERDEPENDENCIES  
Requirement  Service Providers  
Computer  leasing Vendor ABC 
 

 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  15 Plans should  be reviewed by BCP leads for completeness  
□ Program  and Department BCP leads will review completed BCP documentation  
□ Department BCP leads will compile staff contributions in the BCP template  
□ Department BCP leads will review, request clarification from Prog ram Area BCP leads  
□ Completed Department BCP templates will be sent to the BCP coordinator for roll -up 
 
Business Continuity Plan  
✓ Department and Program  Area  BCP Leads are listed as Recovery Managers  
✓ Priorities and RTO’s are listed for each Department and Prog ram 
✓ For each service in the BCP, the following are clearly documented:  
o Service , Recovery Time Objective (RTO) , and Impact Description  
o Minimum Level of Service  
o Procedure  
o Considerations  
o Resource Requirements  
o Interdependencies  
 
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  16 Develop Strategies  
Develop c ontinuity  strategies for the organization  
A temporary loss of operating requirements can immediately prevent or limit  service functions . 
 
• Staff  
• Worksite  
• Telephone  • Email  
• Network  
• Databases/Applications  
Developing generic strategies – and investing in the r esources to enable them – is recommended to 
support services impacted by business disruption in all parts of the organization. Strategies should 
be centrally organized to reduce duplication/effort . 
Stra tegies can range  in cost and complexity:  
 
1. Telework  • Provide laptops to staff who perform critical service.  
• Provide online collaboration tools (eg. Office 365) to all staff  
• Document work -from -home protocols/procedures  
o Using personal computers/devices  
o Ergonomic self -assessment for your home office  
o Employee repor ting protocols (check in/out , etc. ) 
2. Cross -training  • Develop a process for cross -training  staff for critical services  
• Develop a process for developing training materials  
3. Servic e 
Adjustments  • Process for reviewing and adjusting Business Plans  
4. Resource 
Requ irements  • Assess critical services for short -term supply requirements  
• Identify alternate vendors/suppliers for critical supplies  
• Stock -pile resources required for critical services   
• Establish contingency agreements for goods/services with 
other suppliers  
5. Service Providers  • Ensure service providers can meet established RTOs  
• Review Service Level Agreements (SLAs)  
• Establish a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)  
• Request a n audit record of their BCP or DRA (IT Disaster 
Recovery Plan)  
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  17 Select strategies based on t heir cost and suitability  
Strategies must be reviewed and approved by your executive lead.   
Strategies should align to the following criteria:  
1. Fiscal responsibility  Recovery strategies must be aligned with the  organization’s  
overall  financial planning, ob jectives and priorities.  
2. Suitability  Recovery strategies must support the business function Recovery 
Time Objectives (RTO)  and organization’s  recovery strategies.  
3. Reliability  Formal agreements or contracts are required for the use of 
externally sourced s trategies, including critical dependencies.  
4. Test Availability  Recovery strategies must be exercised in order to identify gaps i n 
BCP documentation and validate the ability to support RTOs.  
 
Acquire tools and form agreements to enable strategies  
Once appr oved , strategies can be developed, acquired, or tentatively agreed to.  
□ Document all strategies in your BCP  
□ Review strategies and agreements annually for their suitability and availability  
• Documentation -based strategies should be stored in multiple formats  
• Procedure strategies must follow regular procurement processes and requirements  
• Agreements  with new or existing contractors  may be reviewed  
• Contingency a greements with  new or existing suppliers  may be formed  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  18 Prepare  for Activations  
Develop a Communicat ions Pla n to ensure coordination during activation  
A Crisis Communications Plan should outline:  
• Roles/Responsibilities  
• Coordination – information, frequency, points of contact  
• Activation procedures  
o Initial Response  (Site Response or Self -Activation)  
o Activa tion Phase  (Notification)  
o Operational Phase  (Updates)  
o De-Activation Phase  
• Develop and maintain a contact list  
o Primary/Alternate staff  
o Service Providers/Vendors  
o Site Contacts (School sites, tenants, partners, stakeholders)  
o Government Contacts (Local /Regiona l Authorities, First Nations,  Ministries)  
 
 
 
 
 
  This page will be updated with addit ional resources.  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  19 Provide Training and Awareness for all staff  
General t raining  and awareness should be provided to all staff to increase their participation and 
understanding of the Business Continuity Plan.   
Information pr ovided  to staff may include:  
o What is a Business Continuity Plan (BCP) ? 
o Why do we want  a BCP? 
o When is the BCP implemented?  
o What  is my  role in the BCP ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page will be updated with additional resources.  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  20 Conduct Tabletop Exercises for the plan to iden tify gaps and increase  
staff readiness  
 
Using a discussion -based format, a tabletop exercise considers how the plan would be 
implemented in response to an event.  Exercises test the plan and documentation against a set  
of circumstances.  
 
Tabletop exercises  are intended to  identify gaps  in the plan  and i ncrease readiness  for events . 
Although an exercise supports staff to increase their readiness, an exercise is not designed to  
test the readiness of participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page will be updated with additional resources.  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  21 Activations & Resources  
Additional planning  and implementation resources will be pr ovided  
These guidelines are designed to support school districts and independent school authorities to 
develop a robust BCP for COV ID-19. These guidelines  streamlined a comprehensive BCP 
framework to document continuity strategies and critical services req uired during a pandemic.  
Beyond COVID -19, a dditional assessment and planning is required to expand a BCP to ensure your 
organizatio n is resilient when it resumes regular options. Future planning will involve:  
□ Conduct a risk assessment to identify additiona l planning scenarios  
□ Expand service assessment to all services, beyond those required now  
□ Expand their Crisis Communications Plan to prepare for additional events  
□ Develop  an Emergency  Operations Center  to manage response to complex events  
 
For more information, please contact the Ministry’s Business Continuity Advisor by email . 
 
 
 
 
 
  This page will be updated with additional res ources.  
 
 
 
Updated Apr 30, 2020  22 Glossary of terms used in this document and associated templates  
Branch  An operational unit of an organization (eg. a department).  
Business Function/Unit  A service delivery unit o f an organization (eg. a program).  
Business Impact Analysis  A detailed and documented process designed to identify and 
prioritize business functions and workflow,  which assigns a 
priority by assessing  impacts that might result over time if a 
service were not performed due to a bu siness disruption.  
Business Priority Service  Business function or process that is not mission critical, but 
should it not be performed, could lead to the loss of a major 
government service.  
Business Sub -Function  A procedure or de liverable provided (eg. “Hiring new staff”)  
Critical Services  General term that collectively refers to Business Priority and 
Mission  Critical services.  
Mission Critical Services  Functions and processes that, should they not be performed, 
could lead to lo ss of life or injury, personal hardship to citizens, 
major damage to the environment, or significant loss of 
revenue or assets.  
Reco very Time Objectives  The amount of time that a service can be delayed before an 
unacceptable outcome may occur . 
Risk Asses sment  The overall process of risk identification, risk analysis and risk 
evaluation.