BUSINESS 
CONTINUITY 
POLICY  
This document is not a controlled document if printed.  
 
 - 2 -   
This document sets out the University’s business continuity policy . 
 
To be reviewed annually  and/or when major organisational change occurs.  
 
INTRODUCTION AND CON TEXT  
The loss, or disruption of Aston University critical activities requires an effective Business 
Continuity plan. Good business practice, health and safety duty of care, student expectations 
and increasing regulatory requirements dictate that we have proactive plans and procedures 
to enable us to respond to and manage a major incident or business interruption.  
The University will have in place a st rategy, implemented solutions and documented 
business continuity plans. Achieving these objectives form part of an on -going commitment 
to ensure our strategy, solutions, documentation and staff awareness, remains current and 
effective.  
This document descr ibes the key elements of Business Continuity at Aston University. It is 
divided into the following sections:  
 Business Continuity Planning Policy  
Demonstrates the university’s commitment to protecting its people, assets, reputation and 
educational activitie s. 
 Roles & Responsibilities  
A definition of the key roles in preparing to meet, and recover from, any major incident that 
threatens the continued operation of the University’s academic operations. Responsibilities 
both pre and post incident are described h ere. 
 Business Continuity Planning Standards  
Business Continuity Planning Standards by which Aston University will implement the 
Business Continuity Planning Policy . 
The Business Continuity Policy & Standards document is designed for use by all of its 
facul ties and supporting departments.  The Policy & Standards supplement any regulatory or 
legislative obligations to protect our people, assets, reputation or essential business 
functions and services.  Version  1.4 
Executive Sponsor  Executive director of HR and OD  
Officer Responsible for Policy/ Procedures  Director of Health Safety and Business 
Continuity  
Consultation Process  EOG / HSEEC  
Date of Approval and Committee and/or 
Executive Officer  Executive  
 
Effective Date  January 2020  
 
 - 3 - The Standards embody the principles of Aston Business Cont inuity Policy endorsed by the 
Executive Team. The Standards represent the minimum requirements for the University’s 
Business Continuity Management System (BCMS).  
1. TERMINOLOGY  
Terminology in use throughout this and all other documents that together form the Aston 
University Business Continuity Management System (BCMS).  
Emergency   Any event which requires an immediate 
response to contain the situation and prevent to 
event from escalating or worsening  
Incident  - Any event that threatens our people, assets or 
reputation or seriously impairs, disrupts or halts 
essential academic operations and activities.  
Business Continuity 
Planning  BCP The ability to continue key university operations 
in the event of any incident that interrupts 
normal business at the univers ity. 
Business Continuity Plan  BCP The university’s plan for escalating, addressing 
and recovering from a significant incident.  
Business Continuity 
Management System  BCMS  The management process by which Business 
Continuity eco system, plans and procedures  
are developed, implemented, tested and 
maintained.  
Business Continuity 
Manager  BCM  The person tasked with day -to-day responsibility 
for ensuring that the university adheres to the 
Business Continuity Management regime.  
Business Continuity 
Champion  BCC  The person in each School and support 
department responsible for owning and ensuring 
the School and departmental plans are current.  
Risk Assessment   RA The process by which the university assesses 
its key risks for which it requires a Business 
Continuity Plan.  
Business Impact Analysis  BIA The process by which the university decides 
upon recovery priorities, timescales and 
minimum recovery resources  
Vice Chancellors 
Response Team  VCRT  The university’s strategic level business 
continuity planning and response team.  
Critical Incident 
Response Team  CIRT  The university’s tactical level business continuity 
planning and response team.  
 
  
 
 - 4 - 2. BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLANNING POLICY  
2.1 Business Continuity Policy Statement  
Aston University is committed to the development and implementation of business continuity, 
appropriate to the scale, nature, complexity and geography of the University, and the 
relevant environments in which we operate.  
Aston University believes the way in which we plan, prepare and respond to incidents is key 
to our overall effective recovery and continuance. Business Continuity plays a critical part in 
the University overall control environment.   
All aspects of business continuity planning at Aston are  in keeping with the Business 
Continuity Institute’s (BCI) Good Practice Guide and are aligned to BS EN ISO 22301:2014 . 
2.2 The Key Aims of the Policy  
The key aims of the policy are:  
 The protection of people, assets, earning capacity, information, reputation, brand and 
value of the university and its key stakeholders.  
 Compliance with regulatory and governance obligations following an unforeseen incident.  
 Ensuring that plans are fit for purpose through regular training, updating and testing to 
agreed standards.  
2.3 The Key Principles of the Policy  
The key principles to which Aston University commits, are:  
 Complying with legislation and regulatory requirements and delivering appropriate 
governance and reporting processes.  
 Following the Business Continuity Institute ( BCI) ‘Good Practice Guidelines’ and alignment 
to BS EN ISO 22301:2014 in developing and maintaining Business Continuity strategies 
and plans.  
 Providing adequate resources to achieve delivery of the Business Continuity Management 
programme.  
 Providing approp riate education and training in Business Continuity Management to all 
staff to increase their awareness and to enable them to understand their roles and 
responsibilities.  
 Embedding Business Continuity Management as an integral part of the university’s 
operations and good management practice.  
 Reviewing Business Continuity ‘best practice’ and updating the university’s Business 
Continuity Management strategy and standards accordingly.  
 Developing procedures to assess the effectiveness of Business Continuity pan s and carry 
out testing annually, based upon pertinent scenarios.  
  
 
 - 5 - 3. BUSINESS CONTINUITY STRATEGY  
The intent of business continuity at Aston University is to minimise disruption to the provision 
of higher education and research to our students.  
3.1 Business Continuity Objectives  
Aston University business continuity objectives are to ensure that in respect of incidents:  
 Risks to people and the business are properly identified, evaluated, recorded and 
managed.  
 Measures to avoid or reduce the risk are implement ed at an acceptable cost.  
 Risks, and the measures implemented to control them, are reviewed regularly to ensure 
their continued viability and relevance.  
 All legal, regulatory and duty of care requirements are met.  
 Develop a robust Business Continuity capability through ‘fit for purpose’ plans and 
appropriate education and training for all staff to increase their awareness and skills.  
These objectives are to be met through the implementation of procedures in line wi th the 
Standards as described in the following sections.  
3.2 Business Recovery Intent and Priorities  
Following a disruption or incident, the following business continuity intent and priorities will 
apply:  
‘The intent during a disruption is the continued provis ion of higher education to our students 
in a safe operating environment.’  
To achieve this intent, Aston University maintains the following priorities:  
People:  Safety and well -being of:  
 Staff, contractors and visitors  
 Students  
 Next of Kin  
Education:  Minim ising disruption to:  
 Education and research  
 Assessments  
 Recruitment  
 Student experience  
Assets:  Protecting:  
 Data  
 IT Infrastructure  
 Physical Infrastructure  
Reputation:  Protecting Aston University’s reputation through:  
 Communication with internal stakeholders  
 Communication with external stakeholders  
 
  
 
 - 6 - 4. STRUCTURE, ROLES & R ESPONSIBILITIES  
4.1 Structure  
The overall ownership and accountability for Business Continuity Management rests with the 
Vice-Chancellor ’s Response Team.  
Business Continuity roles a t Aston University are separated into Planning  (i.e. pre -incident) 
roles and Invocation  (i.e. post incident) roles. The organisational structure for Business 
Continuity operates at the Strategic, Tactical and Operational levels.  
Planning teams in essence take up key response roles following a major incident, as shown 
below:  
Planning Organisation (Pre -Incident)     Invocation Organisation (Post -Incident)  
  
GOLD
TEAM
BRONZE
TEAMSRole: Strategic
•Consider wider issues
•Give direction
•High level liaison
•Media facing
Role: Tactical
•Report to VCRT
•Assess impact
•Co-ordinate recovery
•Handle logistics
Role: Operational
•Report to CIRT
•Focus on core activities
•Handle Work -in-progress
•Liaise with key clients
SILVER
TEAMRole: BC Ownership
•Sponsor BCP
•Set Policy
•Agree budgets/resources
•Provide BCM oversight
Role: BC Management
•Report to ExeComm
•Champion BCP
•Manage BCM programme
•Monitor remedial actions
Role: BC Support
•Report to Steer. Group
•Maintain departmental plan
•Support exercises & tests
•Promote staff awarenessEXEC
COMM
DEPT
ADMINS
STEERING
GROUP
GOLD
LEVEL
SILVER
LEVEL
BRONZE
LEVEL
Vice -Chancellor’s 
Response Team
VCRT
Critical Incident 
Response Team
CIRT
Schools and 
Support Services 
Departments
 
 
 
 
 - 7 - 4.2 Team Membership  
  

 
 - 8 - 4.3 Key roles and responsibilities  
Ser. Role  Responsibilities during business as 
usual  Responsibilities during a 
disruption  
1 Vice 
Chancellor ’s 
Response Team   Actively supports the Business 
Continuity Management programme.  
 Allocates adequate resources and 
budget to business continuity.  
 Approves the business continuity 
Business Continuity Plan,  
 Ensures the continued effectiveness 
of the business continuity approach.  
 Appoints the business continuity 
manager.  
 Attends annual training and exercise.   Forms the Strategic Team.  
 Sets policy and direction  
 Repre sents the public face 
of the university.  
2 Executive 
Director of 
Human 
Resources & 
Organisational 
Development  
 
Director of 
Health, Safety 
and Business 
Continuity   Accountable for ensuring that 
appropriate business continuity 
arrangements are implemented fo r the 
processes, systems and other 
resources upon which the university 
depends.  
 Develops and maintains the business 
continuity programme, which 
describes how, by whom and with 
what frequency the various elements 
of the business continuity 
arrangements, are  to be tested.  
 Acts as the business continuity expert 
throughout the university.  
 Supports all aspects of tenders and 
client assurance relating to business 
continuity.  
 As required reports to the VCRT on 
the status and progress of business 
continuity.  Assists the VCRT and the CIRT 
as might be required in terms of 
adherence to processes.  
 Critical Incident 
Response Team 
(CIRT)   Meet to review the Business 
Continuity Management programme, 
progress, issues etc.  
 Reports annual Business Continuity 
Management  Programme status to the 
VCRT.  
 Set the schedule for coming year.  
 Attends annual training and exercise.   Assess impact and plan 
response and recovery  
 Provide direction to School 
and Support Departments  
 Manage resources  
 
 - 9 - Ser. Role  Responsibilities during business as 
usual  Responsibilities during a 
disruption  
4 School and 
Support 
Department 
Business 
Continuity 
Champion  
(See Annex A)   On behalf of Head of School or 
Support Department, implements and 
maintains the School or support 
department response plan in 
accordance with Aston University’s 
business continuity policy.  
 Ensures staff in the off ice are aware of 
business continuity arrangements.  
 Co-ordinates validation of business 
continuity arrangements for own 
School or department.   Member of the site response 
team.  
 Oversees the administrative 
support for the site response 
team.  
 Acts as the busin ess 
continuity expert for the site 
response team.  
5 Head of School 
or Support 
Department   Signs off own Business Impact 
Analysis and Business Continuity 
plan.  
 Nominates School and Department 
Business Continuity Champion (BCC).    
 
  
 
 - 10 - 5. BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLANNING STANDARDS  
5.1 Introduction  
The Standards embody the principles of Aston University’s Business Continuity Policy 
endorsed by the VCRT.  These standards supplement any local regulatory or legislative 
obligations to protect essential business functions and services.  The standards define best 
Business Continuity practice and provide the basis for more detailed local standards where 
these are appropriate.  
5.2 Governance & Reporting  
In order to assure compliance with the Business Continuity Policy and that an appropriate 
level of Business Continuity Management capability is developed and maintained, Business 
Continuity is to be reported to the VCRT on an annual basis, or more frequently when 
considered necessary by the CIRT.   
5.3 The Business Continuity Management  Programme Life Cycle  
Business Continuity strategies, solutions and plans are complex and require considerable 
effort to maintain, communicate and exercise. The Business Continuity Management effort is 
best approached as a three -year rolling programme.  
The Business Continuity Institute (BCI) – an internationally recognised good practice 
authority – recommends the following approach, a life cycle based on the Plan -Do-Check -
Act model:  
 
                      The Plan -Do-Check -Act model  The BCI’s Business Continuity Management cycle  

 
 - 11 - 6. POLICY AND PROGRAMME  MANAGEMENT  
The Business Continuity Policy and Standards document sets out the scope and governance 
for the Business Continuity Management programme. It sets out the methodology by which 
the programme will be delivered.  
The Business Continuity Management programme requires the following documents to be 
maintained:  
Ser Document  Frequency 
of update  Author  
1.  Business Continuity Policy and 
Standards.  Annual.  Director of Health, Safety and 
Business Continuity  
2.  Business Continuity Programme 
Schedule.  On-going.  Director of Health, Safety and 
Business Continuity  
7. ANALYSIS  
7.1 Business Impact Analysis (BIA)  
A review of the BIA will be conducted at least every two years and is part of the strategic 
review process. It may not be necessary to conduct a full BIA survey but the review will at 
least confirm or provide an opportunity to amend the findings of the mos t recent BIA.  
Amongst other things, the BIA will determine:  
 Critical activities.  
 Recovery Time Objectives (RTO) for all activities.  
 Recovery resource requirements (workspaces, systems, services etc.) required to 
maintain Critical activities.  
Through an un derstanding of organisational changes and technology developments within 
the university, and an understanding of the criticality of activities achieved through the BIA 
the CIRT will be able to determine whether or not the current recovery strategies meet t he 
university’s needs.  
7.2 Risk Assessment  
Aston University will maintain a university wide Business Continuity Risk Register which will 
integrate into the University’s group wide Risk Register.  
Within Business Continuity, a Risk Assessment will identify risk s to the University, its people, 
assets, operations and reputation that will inform the Business Continuity Management plans 
and programme.  
A review of the key risks will be conducted annually and is part of the strategic review 
process.  
  
 
 - 12 - 7.3 Impact Levels  
In order to set a common level of impact metrics across the process, Aston University will 
use the following impact levels for all analysis.  
Impact Type  Sub 
Impact 
Type  Level of Impact 
– Impact Score      
  Dealt with by 
School/schools 
or prof services 
unit. Dealt with by 
School/schools 
or prof services 
unit but CIRT 
informed  CIRT with 
VCRT informed  VCRT and 
CIRT active  VCRT and 
CIRT active  
  1 2 3 4 5 
  Insignificant  Minor  Moderate  
Tolerance - 
RTO  Major  
MAO  Extreme  
People  Safety  Minor Injury 
(local first aid) - 
no psychological 
effects  
 Injury (out 
patient) - no 
long term 
psychological 
effects  Temporary 
Disability (in 
patient) <20 
people require 
counselling  Death or life 
changing 
injury 20 -100 
people 
require 
counselling  Multiple 
Fatalities 100 
people  require 
counselling  
 Staff 
availabilit
y Potential staff 
absenteeism of 
less than 10% in 
a School / 
department.  Potential staff 
absenteeism of 
up to 25% in a 
School / 
department.  Potential staff 
absenteeism of 
up to 50% in a 
School / 
department.   
 Potential staff 
absenteeism 
of up to 75% 
in a School / 
department.  Potential staff 
absenteeism 
over 75% in a 
School / 
department.  
 Wellbein
g Insignificant 
inconvenience 
staff/student.  Minor 
staff/student 
dissatisfaction 
that requires 
some local 
recompense.  Staff/student 
dissatisfaction 
that requires 
some formal 
apology and 
recompense.  Major 
staff/student 
dissatisfaction 
that involves 
claim through 
legal 
representative
. Major 
staff/student 
dissatisfaction 
that is being 
taken to law 
courts for 
significant 
claim.  
Assets  Financial 
(Loss / 
Cost)  <£100k  £100k - £1m  £1m - £5m  £5m - £20m  >£20m  
 Premises 
availabilit
y Alternate real 
estate available 
for activity at 
dep/func level  Alternate real 
estate available 
for activity in 
wider university  5-10% of 
university 
compromised - 
alternate real 
estate required 
outside of 
university  10-25% of 
university 
compromised 
- alternate 
real estate 
required 
outside of 
university  25-50% of 
university 
compromised - 
alternate real 
estate required 
outside of 
university  
 IT 
Services  Minor local 
outage  Prolonged 
localized outage 
more than 24 
hours  Loss of several 
systems  
Less than 24 
hours  Loss of 
several 
systems more 
than 24 hours  Loss of all 
systems eg 
active directory 
failure  
Reputation  N/A Reference in 
press but no 
reputational 
damage  Reputational 
criticism 
requiring a 
considered 
response  Reputational 
damage 
requiring 
proportionate 
response  Reputational 
loss requiring 
strategic 
intervention  Irredeemable 
loss of 
reputation with 
effect on 
strategic intent  
 
 - 13 - Compliance  N/A No Impact / 
sanction  Adverse 
assessment of 
service  Adverse 
assessment at 
business level; 
remedial action 
urgent  Adverse 
assessment 
published and 
sanctions 
imposed  Regulator 
exercises 
powers with 
impact on 
university 
strategy with 
organisati onal 
re-adjustment  
Services, 
Teaching, 
Research 
and 
Innovation  N/A Minor Disruption  Disruption to 
services / 
faculties  Failure to 
deliver key 
services  Prolonged 
failure of 
several 
services  Sustained 
failure to deliver 
all services  
 
The Business Continuity Management programme requires the following documents to be 
maintained:  
Ser. Document  Frequency 
of update  Author  
1.  Business impact analysis and risk 
assessment methodology.  Annual.  Director of Health, Safety and 
Business Continuity  
2.  School and Support Department 
Business impact analyses.  Annual.  Relevant School and Support 
Department Business Continuity 
Coordinators.  
3.  University business continuity risk 
assessment.  Annual.  Director of Health, Safety and 
Business Continuity  
 
8. DESIGN  
The design phase identifies and selects appropriate strategies and tactics to determine how 
recovery from disruption and continuity will be achieved. The design phase of Business 
Continuity enables Aston University to determine and document appropriate Bus iness 
Continuity strategies. This incorporates:  
 A response structure that allows the University to respond to any given disruption in an 
appropriate and proportionate manner.  
 Recovery options that enable us to meet the recovery times identified for each cr itical 
activity.  
 Mitigation measures that will reduce the likelihood and or reduce the impact of the 
identified threats.  
  
 
 - 14 - 9. IMPLEMENT ATION  
Aston’s crisis management and recovery Plans enable the university to execute agreed 
strategies and tactics. The plans  identify and document the priorities, procedures, 
responsibilities and resources to assist each response team to manage a disruption, while 
implementing continuity and recovery strategies to a pre -determined level.  
The Business Continuity Management progr amme requires the following plans to be 
maintained:  
Ser Document  Frequency 
of update  Author  
1. VCRT Crisis Management and 
Recovery Plan.  Annual.  Director of Health, Safety and 
Business Continuity.  
2. CIRT Crisis Management and 
Recovery Plan.  Annual.  Director of Health, Safety and 
Business Continuity.  
3. School and Support Department 
Recovery Plans.  Annual.  Relevant School and Support 
Department Business Continuity 
Coordinators.  
4. Individual business continuity aide 
memoires  Annual.  Director of Heal th, Safety and 
Business Continuity.  
10. VALIDATE  
Validation is the phase that confirms that Business Continuity is meeting the identified 
objectives and that the university’s arrangements are fit for purpose. The purpose of 
validation is to ensure that the B usiness Continuity capability reflects the nature, scale and 
complexity of Aston University to ensure it is current, accurate, and complete, with actions 
taken to continually improve business continuity.  
10.1 Training and Exercising  
Testing is an on -going process. Exercising and testing  the business continuity capability and 
competence falls into three categories:  
 Emergency Response: emergency evacuation drills should be undertaken twice yearly.  
 Cascade Call:  testing the key contacts callout should take place every year.  
 Scenario:  there should be a scenario based workshop exercise of the VCRT and CIRT 
every year.  
 Recovery Testing:  tests of the recovery strategies should be carried out annually. Such 
tests will encompass technology and/ or user exercises.  
10.2 Management Review  
The CIRT will meet at the end of each programme year to answer and report to the VCRT on 
the question:  
Is our Business Continuity strategy still fit for purpose?  
The agenda will address the question: Is our Business Con tinuity strategy appropriate?  
 Does it take into account organisational changes that have occurred in the past year?  
 
 - 15 -  Have there been any major technology upgrades, additions that are no longer covered by 
the current solution(s)?  
 Do the recovery strategies m eet regulatory and the university’s requirements?  
The review should take into account the results and recommendations from tests and 
exercises conducted over the past year alongside the findings of the most recent Risk 
Assessment (RA) and Business Impact A nalysis (BIA).  
Programme Management  
At the beginning of each year, targets and objectives for the year will be set and agreed by 
the VCRT. These will then be reviewed at year -end to measure achievements, reschedule 
and/or redirect planning efforts etc. fo r the coming year.  
10.3 Post disruption reviews  
If there is a formalised response to a disruption at the university, i.e. the CIRT has been 
invoked, then a post -disruption review will be undertaken to ensure all lessons are captured. 
Lessons identified thus bec ome lessons learnt.  
The Director of Health, Safety and Business Continuity (or School/Support Department 
Business Continuity Coordinator if affected) is responsible for documenting post disruption 
reviews.  
The Business Continuity Management programme requ ires the following documents to be 
maintained:  
Ser Activity or Document  Frequency of update  
 Management review by VCRT.  Annual.  
 Management review by CIRT.  As a minimum - Annual.  
 Business continuity exercises for the VCRT and 
the CIRT.  Annual.  
 Evidence of staff awareness training.  As required.  
 Post exercise reports.  As required.  
 Post disruption reviews.  On going.  
 
 
  
 
 - 16 -