CREDITACCESS GRAMEEN LIMITED  
 
 
Vendor Management Policy  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 2 of 9 
 
 
Revision  History  
 
Version  Author  Description  of Changes  Release  Date  
1 Loyal Quadras  
DGM – Risk  
 
Mahantesh Dhangi,  
Information Security 
Manager  
 First version  March 23, 2022  
 
 
Version  Author  Reviewed  by Approved  by 
1 Loyal Quadras  
DGM – Risk 
 
Mahantesh Dhangi,  
Information 
Security Manager  
 Firoz Anam  
Chief Risk Officer  
 
Sudesh Puthran  
Chief Technology 
Officer  Board  of 
Directors  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 3 of 9 
Contents  
 
1 Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  4 
2 Scope  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  4 
3 Principles of Vendor Risk Management  ................................ ................................ ....... 4 
4 Vendor’s Code of Conduct  ................................ ................................ .........................  5 
5 Vendor Management / Governance Process  ................................ ................................  5 
6 Vendor Categorization  ................................ ................................ ...............................  7 
7 Risk Assessment at Onboarding  ................................ ................................ .................  7 
8 Vendor Inventory  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 8 
9 Periodic Review of Vendor Risk  ................................ ................................ ..................  8 
10 Roles and Responsibilities  ................................ ................................ ..........................  9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 4 of 9 
 
 
 
1 Introduction  
 
Vendor Management is the process of ensuring that the use of service providers and suppliers 
does not create an unacceptable potential for business disruption or a negative impact on 
business performance .  
 
The purpose of this document  is to define a framework for driving  vendor management program 
within CA Grameen during the entire lifecy cle of outsourcing  w.r.t; Initiation till Termination.   
2 Scope  
 
This framework specifies the requirements for establishing, implementing, maintaining , and 
continually improving a Vendor Management system . This framework  includes requirements for 
the assessment and treatment of vendor related  risks as per the needs of the organization. Th is 
framework will act as a guiding document to the Top Management, Purchase Committee, 
members of Information Security team, users of th e business units, vendors, third -party 
employees who are involved in Vendor Management  across the organization irrespective of the 
location of office/branches  of CA Grameen . The policy will also ensure that the values of CA 
Grameen with regards to the envi ronmental standards, human rights, and ethical business 
practice are being followed by the suppliers and all their personnel.  
 
3 Principles of Vendor Risk Management  
CA Grameen is committed to the ethical establishment , implementation , and maintenance of 
service outsourcing  process . CA Grameen sha ll ensure protection of information belonging to 
clients, licensees and their clients, employee information, and all other proprietary information  
held within the CA Grameen information process ing facilities and systems  while the services are 
outsourced to third party.  Vendor Management Policy provides the management’s directive 
towards vendor management . The policy shall be communicated within the organization and 
shared with interested parties , as appropriate, after  necessary  approvals . 
 
The salient principles are as follows:  
➢ Establish a fair system that allows unbiased opportunities to all third parties . 
➢ Establish roles and responsibilities for vendor Management  
➢ Ensure that all risks related to outsourcing are addressed/considered prior vendor 
onboarding and continuous monitoring of the risk s and their  remediations  are performed 
via periodic assessments.  
➢ Provide sufficient resources to establish, implement, operat e, monitor, review, maintain 
and improve the  vendor management process.  
➢ Ensure that all third parties involved in vendor management have to adhere to the relevant 
legal and regulatory requirements through legally enforceable contracts  
➢ Ensure that policies, standards, procedures, and guidelines are developed, reviewed, and 
updated for the implementation of vendor management  
 
 
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 5 of 9 
4 Vendor’s Code of Conduct  
 
Environment Sustainability  
a) Supplier shall  follow all laws of the land including laws on  Environment sustainability and 
protection while executing any work for the Company.  
b) Establish operational practices which minimize the impact on the environment and deploy 
measures to prevent and reduce harm to the environment.  
c) Efficient use of natural resources and application of energy -efficient, environment -friendly 
technologies and reduction of waste as well as emissions to air, water, and soil.  
d) Comply to waste segregation and disposal rules laid down by the center/state/local 
authorities.  
e) Work actively to improve the environment in the communities in which they operate and 
minimize their impact on biodiversity, climate change.  
Social Responsibility   
 
a) The supplier shall comply with all local employment, labour laws, and laws regarding human 
rights in the operating geographies.  
b) Supplier shall commit to eliminating any kind of forced labour & child labour.  
c) Suppliers shall provide their employees with a workplace free of harsh and inhumane 
treatment, without any sexual harassment, sexual abuse, corporal punishment or torture, 
mental or physical coercion or verbal abuse of employees, or the threat of any such treatment.  
d) Suppliers will provide a safe work ing environment through proactive management and 
controls that minimize health and safety risks and support accident prevention.   
e) All employees should be paid a fair wage commensurate with prevailing industry conditions 
or the minimum wage, whichever is h igher.  
f) Suppliers shall ensure that their employees have a mechanism to report grievances and that 
facilitates open communication between management and employees.  Being responsible for 
employee compensation and payment of fair wages.  
g) Suppliers must provide a work environment that is free of discrimination based on race, 
colour, age, gender, sexual orientation, ethnic origin, religious beliefs, political views, or any 
other prohibited ground. Their staff recruitment practices must also comply with the  principle 
of equal opportunities for similar skills.  
5 Vendor Management  / Governance  Process  
a) Discovering a business need  
i. The respective function  determines it needs to improve an existing process, reduce 
costs, or create a new product.  
ii. Once the need is identified, a cost -and-benefit analysis is undertaken. A decision 
is made to either use internal resources or outsource the work . Organizations  
usually seek outside help because they believe the vendor can do the work faster, 
better, and/or at a lower cost  
iii. The decision to use a vendor (to outsource an activity) should be in line with long 
term strategic interest of the company and shouldn’t lead to undue increase in risk 
profile of the company  
b) Developing the scope of work  
i. Make sure that the scope of work syncs with the need’s  assessment determined in 
the first stage.  
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 6 of 9 
ii. CA Grameen should  maintain a list of vendors in a central location, review that list 
to see if it makes sense to expand the relationship with an existing vendor rather 
than hire a new one.  
c) Issuing request for proposals  (RFP)  
i. To ensure CA Grameen  select the best vendo r, the respective function shall  float 
request for  proposals and information from vendors . 
ii. If the vendor is expected to  handle a core business process, a cross -functional 
team shall be formed to finalize the RFP. 
d) Conducting due diligence  
i. Be aware of increased vulnerability in the areas of strategic, reputation, 
compliance, transaction, operational, social media, credit, and other risks. The 
subsequent sections shall provide additional guidance on due diligence.  
ii. Specific importance shall be  given to understand how vendor deals with sensitive 
customer information  and whether these meets required regulatory norms  
iii. Vendor must disclose if any employee or director of CA Grameen holds direct or 
indirect interest with the vendor  
e) Selection of Vendor  
i. The respective HOD shall evaluate all proposal and select a vendor for the 
proposed work  
ii. The vendor should be evaluated based on objective criteria to the extent possible  
iii. HOD shall obtain necessary approval as per the laid down expense approval 
procedure  
f) Negotiating contracts  for critical / significant vendors:  
i. Respective functions  should ensure that the contract includes information security 
clauses . 
ii. the right to audit the vendor  and their subcontractors  for outsourced partners.  
iii. The contract should require the vendor to notify CA Grameen if the vendor 
experiences financial difficulty, catastrophic events,  information security incidents , 
a change in its strategic goals, or significant staffing changes.  
iv. By including exact, quantifiable parameter s along with clearly defined scope of 
work in the contract, one can  establish clear expectations regarding the vendor’s 
responsibilities  
v. The contract should also specify consequences if the expectations are not met. If 
incentives for superior performance a re to be awarded, they should be included in 
the contract.  A clearly defined exist clause should be in place.  
vi. Background checks, non -disclosure and security policy compliance agreements 
shall be in place  
vii. Should include clauses on  audit trails, r ecord retention and evidencing   
viii. Should clearly specify payment terms, escalation /complaint mechanism  etc. 
 
g) Monitoring Performance  
i. The respective function needs to  periodically  monitor the vendor’s performance, 
assess the risk  (Refer  Section 8)  
ii. Even if the line of business manages the vendor’s performance, key information 
about the vendors should be kept in a centralized location  (Refer Section 7) .  
iii. Respective function  shall consider developing KPI’s to monitor the performance of 
vendors and this should be presented during periodic review  
iv. Changes in services provided by suppliers should be agreed only after a thorough  
review  including assess ment of  any information security implications so that the 
effectiveness of controls is maintained . 
 
h) Terminating or Renewing Contracts  
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 7 of 9 
i. Respective functions shall  renew contract after review ing the business need for 
the vendor and determine whether CA Grameen needs to outsource or can build 
inhouse capability  
ii. Based on the vendor’s performance and existing market competition, it may be 
more advantageous to continue with the existing vendor or to create a new 
relationship (without a service disruption)  
iii. Respective functions shall have a  contingency plan in case the vendor becomes 
unreliable,  and the  relationship needs to  be discontinued . 
iv. Respective functions  shall ensure Vendor contracts after termination are archived 
and maintained to meet the regulatory requirements.  
6 Vendor Categorization  
 
Vendors shall be categorized into three levels  
1. Critical  - Vendors are categorized as critical if they can cause significant financial loss or 
can lead to business disruptions beyond 24 hours or lead to reputational loss or regulatory 
non-compliance if they fail to deliver services as promised, or if they are breached. 
Example: data center, application vendors etc.  
2. Significant  – Significant vendors are those that provide services to CA Grameen, 
managing the inner workings of our business so it runs as efficiently as possible. In the 
event of failure, the impact is limited to monetary impact in the form of efficiency loss  or 
disruptions less than 24 hours . Example: ISP, HRIS etc. 
3. Non-essential  - If a break  in the supply chain occurred, alternative can be arranged 
promptly and there would be little or no consequences to maintaining service levels and 
customer service. Example: Office Supplies  
 
7 Risk Assessment  at Onboarding  
a) A due diligence must be performed on one or more of the likely selected vendors. The 
depth of the due diligence may vary according to the relative importance of the vendor 
relationship, but it should cover the following areas:  
i. Existence and corporate history. Vendor’s business hi story and market 
share for a given service  
ii. Financial strength, solvency to carry out the task/project with satisfaction  
iii. Dependency on key employee s; whether loss of 1 -2 employees can put the 
delivery at risk  
iv. Qualifications, backgrounds and reputations of c ompany principals, 
including criminal background checks where appropriate  
v. Vendor’s reputation (including adverse media reports) and past 
performance with similar business partners  
vi. Internal control environment. Consider reviewing their audit reports, 
intern al control evaluations and assessments of the third parties as per the 
business applicability . 
vii. Legal and compliance including any regulatory actions and/or anti -bribery 
corruption risk  
viii. Reliance on and success in dealing with third party service providers .  
The type of access the third party will have to CreditAccess Grameen’s 
information assets  and the value and sensitivity of information involved . 
ix. Insurance coverage. Ensure that the vendor has sufficient coverage to 
insure against losses due to dishonest acts, and liability coverage for losses 
due to negligent acts .  
x. Ability to comply with information security requirements  
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 8 of 9 
xi. Ability to meet disaster recovery and business continuity requirements.  
xii. Whether employee/ Director has a direct or indirect interest on the vendor  
b) The extent of due diligence may vary depending on the vendor classification as per matrix 
below  
  
             
Parameter  Critical  Significant  Non-essential  
Corporate History  Y Y  
Financial Strength  Y Y  
Employee Profile  Y Y  
Internal Control  Y Y  
DR/ BCP  Y   
Information  Security  Y Y  
Data Protection  Y Y Y 
Third Party Reliance  Y   
Reputation  Y Y Y 
Insurance Coverage  Y   
Anti-Bribery  / Corruption  Y Y Y 
8 Vendor Inventory  
An inventory of vendors shall be maintained centrally which shall include name, description, 
categorization by criticality , last review details  and relationship owner . The list must be up to date 
at all time s. 
 
9 Periodic Review of Vendor Risk  
a) Periodic review of vendor shall be done by the respective vendor relationship owner . The 
review shall include at a minimum:  
• Whether the vendor has delivered as per expectation since the last review or there 
were clearly identifiable deficiencies  
• Deterioration  in financial situation since la st review and if this is material in nature  
• Change in management or Loss of key personnel that can impact the delivery  
• Any cyber security incident in vendor site; observation from of IT audit report  
• Any adverse med ia report (print  or social media) that can impact delivery or can 
have associated reputational harm to CAGL  
• Whether respective function has a contingency plan in place i n case of disruptions 
at the vendor end (applicable for critical vendor only)  
• Whether CA Grameen employee or director  has Direct / Indirect interest on the 
vendor . 
 
b) When to perform periodic review  
 
Vendor Criticality  Risk Level  Risk Monitoring 
frequency  
Critical  High At least once per year  
Significant  Medium  Every other year  
Non-essential  Low Not Required  
 
Internal Use Only  
CreditAccess Grameen Limited   Page 9 of 9 
 
 
10 Roles and Respo nsibilities   
• Risk management shall be res ponsible for development and updation  of vendor 
management framework and shall develop necessary templates  (due diligence, periodic 
review etc.)  to be used by the relevant functions.  
• Respective functions shall be responsible for vendor selection, classification, due diligence,  
on-boarding, contingency planning  and periodic review of the vendor . 
• Risk Management shall be responsible for maintaining centralized vendor inventory , 
monitor initial due diligence and monitor periodic review of vendors .