Acceptable Use Agreement for  Government -Provided  
Computer Technology for External  Contracts  
Introduction:  
This agreement is in place to protect employees, the employer and the information in the Governments custody  or 
under the control of a public body. It applies to all employees, independent contractors, temporary workers and  all 
other individuals using Government owned electronic information  resources.  
  
The confidentiality,  integrity  and availability  of computer  technology  used  inside  or outside  the work  place,  
that contains client and personal information, must be preserved at all times. Access to this  Government - 
provided  technology  is granted  under  the following  conditions:  
  
 
1. Government -provided computer technology is to be used to support authorized programs and  services.  
2. Users must use only system information technology they are authorized to use and use them only in the manner and  to 
the extent authorized. Ability to access information technology resources does not, by itself, imply authorization to do  so. 
3. Changing the Government –provided computer system configuration is not permitted unless approved by End  User  
Support.  
4. Personal use of Government -provided computer technology is to be of an appropriate nature that will not incur  additional  
cost or increased risk to the Government. Such technology is not to be used for any personal activity that may  cause  
embarrassment to y ou or the Government and must not be used to access or promote inappropriate sites, including  but 
not limited to pornography, racism, hatred, gambling, obscenity or any illegal  activities.  
5. You are responsible and accountable for the use of your user ID, pa sswords and other access control items in  your 
possession for computer technology.  They are not to be  shared.  
6. The bandwidth available to Government is limited. Therefore the use of streaming audio and video (e.g. Online  radio,  
YouTube, etc.) should be limited to a work related  need.  
7. Removal of, or alterations to, Government -provided computer hardware or components must be approved by End  User  
Support.  
8. Prior to downloading or installing software on Government -provided hardware co nfirmation of acceptability must  be 
obtained from your Departmental Information Technology Consultants  (ITC). 
9. You must not violate the privacy of other users and their accounts, regardless of whether those accounts are  securely 
protected. Technical ability t o access other’s accounts does not, by itself, imply authorization to do  so. 
10. You should not leave your computer unattended while logged on to the network. A password protected screen saver  is 
required to reactivate a session after 5 minutes of  inactivity.  
11. Work related electronic data must be stored on the Government -provided file server where possible. If work  related  
electronic data is not stored on the file server it is your responsibility to prepare and maintain backup copies  in 
accordance with Governmen t Policies, the Archives and Records Act and the Freedom of Information and Protection  of 
Privacy  Act. 
12. Wilful or intentional violations of this agreement will be considered to be misconduct and violators of this agreement  may 
be denied access to the Government -provided computer technology and may be subject to other penalties  and 
disciplinary action. Violation of this Agreement may result in discipline that may include but not be limited to  termination  
or employment and/or oth er legal  action.  
13. I understand and agree that when my employment with Government ceases, for whatever reason, my authorization  to 
use the Government -provided computer technology and system also  ceases  
 
I have read and understand “The Acceptable Use Agreemen t for Government –Provided  Computer  
Technology”  and recognize  that technical  monitoring  takes  place  to protect  the system  and ensure  users  are 
complying  with this policy.  I agree  to access and  use the Government -provided  computer  technology only  in 
accordance with the terms and conditions set out in this  Agreement.  
 
Date:   Name of User:    
(Please  Print)  
 
 
Witness:   User  Signature:     
Definitions:  
 
Acceptable  Use Policy  (AUP)  is a written  agreement  all users  of the Government -provided  computer  technology  
adhere to for the common good. An AUP defines the intended uses of the network including unacceptable uses  and 
the consequences for  non-compliance.  
 
Computer  Hardware  refers  to workstations,  stand  alone  computers,  network  computers,  laptops,  notebooks,  
servers, PDAs, Blackberries and any other  peripherals.  
 
Computer  Software  refers  to written  programs,  procedures  or rules  and associated  documentation  pertaining  to the 
operation  of a computer  system,  which  includes  packaged  software,  downloadable  executables,  screen  savers,  
macro, freeware and  shareware.  
 
Computer  Technology,  for the purpose  of this agreement,  is Computer  Systems  and all electronic  data.  
 
Electronic  Data  is data  that is stored  and readable  in electronic  form  without  regard  to the hardware  or software  
used to produce the data, excluding computer  software.  
 
Office  of Information  is the designated  authority  responsible  for maintaining  and monitoring  compliance  with  
Government Security Policies and  Directives.  
 
SecurID : is a mechanism  developed  for performing  two-factor  authentication  for a user  to a network  resource.  
 
Token : are used to prove one' s identity electronically. The token is used in addition to or in place of a password  to 
prove  that the employee  is who  they  claim  to be. The token  acts like an electronic  key to access  something.  
 
Virtual  Private  Network  (VPN):  is a network  that uses  primarily  public  telecommunication  infrastructure,  such  as 
the Internet,  to provide  remote  offices  or traveling  user’s access  to a central  organizational  network.  
 
 
 
Disciplinary  Action:  
 
Please take the time to peruse the following link. It will be useful in explaining where the discipline  consequence  
arise from any  violation.  
 
Treasury  Board  – Section  16.02  – Security  Policies:  http://iis.peigov/dept/tboard/manual/pdf/sec1602.pdf