The General Data 
Protection Regulation 
(GDPR)
AN EPSU BRIEFING
2

3Foreword
The new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) came into force on 25 May 2018. 
For EPSU, data protection, privacy and cybersecurity in our public services and in trade 
unions are among the biggest regulatory issues we face. Public service workers and 
trade unionists can use the introduction of the GDPR as a way to improve how we deal 
with personal data and workers’ privacy. Public services providers are using more and 
more data to perform their duties. Workers from the health care sector process and 
analyse sensitive data and have access to medical records. Public administrations also 
process large sets of personal data.
For this reason it is essential that trade unions use the new GDPR rules to the fullest 
extent for a more effective protection of workers’ and citizens’ data. 
Compliance with the GDPR entails administrative and technical challenges. Since the 
entry into force of the new regulation, EPSU has been advocating full involvement of 
workers organizations in the implementation of the GDPR at all levels, in particular, to 
ensure workers’ privacy. Our actions are aimed at ensuring that GDPR compliance does 
not create additional burdens for workers in applying and implementing data protec -
tion policies or lead to a shift of responsibility to them. 
Employers are responsible for ensuring compliance, especially in cases of breaches of 
privacy. The entry into force of the new regulation can represent a change to the way 
they work. For this reason our role as trade unions is fundamental: workers need to be 
informed about their rights and responsibilities when they are data collectors and pro -
cessors and more aware of their rights as data subjects. 
This guide examines the GDPR from three different perspectives: the impact on work -
ers, on public services as well as on trade unions. The last part is devoted to how we can 
ensure compliance in our trade unions. 
We hope that this guide is a useful introduction to the issues raised by GDPR. 

This guide has been developed by Paul Reuter.
Revisions from Aida Ponce, ETUI.
Supervision and Guidance from Luca Scarpiello, Penny 
Clarke, Richard Pond.
A huge Thank You to our affiliates and everyone who helped 
and contributed to this GDPR-related guide.
The information in this publication is for general information 
purposes only. EPSU assumes no responsibility for errors or 
omissions in the contents of the publication. In no event will 
EPSU be liable for any special, direct, indirect, consequential 
or incidental damages or any damages whatsoever in con -
nection with the use of this document.
5
CONTENTS
Foreword
Obligations and rights under the GDPR
What’s new in the GDPR
How should data be processed?
Lawful basis and limits to processing personal data
Individual Rights of data subjects
Data security
Liability
The GDPR and the Public Sector
Guidelines on compliance for trade unions
Further information and reading3
7
10
13
17
23
28
30
34
37
6

7  What’s new in the GDPR
This guide will consider the impact that the GDPR has on how this personal data1 is col -
lected and processed, how it is kept safe, how compliance is guaranteed, who is liable 
for what and what rights a citizen has. Member States have the right to pass further pro -
visions in some aspects but information on the national implementation of the GDPR 
should be obtained from national data protection authorities.
The GDPR differentiates between data controllers, data processors and data protec -
tion officers (DPO). 
The Data Controller and Data Processor
In general terms, the data controller the natural or legal person (could be a company 
or a non-profit organisation), public authority, agency or other body which, alone or 
jointly with others, the purposes, conditions and means of processing personal data. 
In other words, the controller owns the data and sets the rules how it is to be collected 
and processed. The controller therefore keeps a record of all processing activities and 
furthermore designates one or more data processors that can, in the name of the data 
controller, collect and process the data. 
However, this distinction does not always clearly apply in practice, although it has 
existed in previous data protection regulations, and the status of employees of data 
controllers is still disputed. According to the UK data protection authority an employee 
of a data controller cannot be considered as a data processor2, which would suggest 
that he or she is a data controller. However, if the same processing activities would be 
outsourced (e.g. to an external consultant), this external party would be considered as a 
data processor. The GDPR lacks a crucial point in the definition, which has implications 
for liability and responsibility.
Obligations and rights under the GDPR
1 For the purposes of the GDPR, personal data means any information relating to an identified or identifiable 
individual. An identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, by reference to an 
identification number or one or more factors specific to his/her physical, physiological, mental, economic, 
cultural or social identity (such as name, date of birth, biometrics data, fingerprints or DNA).
2 Information Commissioner’s Office. “Data controllers and data processors: what the governance implications 
are.” June 5, 2014. Accessed July 25, 2018 https://ico.org.uk/media/for-organisations/documents/1546/data-
controllers-and-data-processors-dp-guidance.pdf p. 4.
8The Data Protection Officer (DPO)
The Data Protection Officer has the role of ensuring that the organisation is processing 
personal data in compliance with GDPR rules. It has to be designated on the basis of 
professional qualities and knowledge of data protection law and practices.  In some in -
stances, the data controller has an obligation to appoint a data protection officer. This 
is the case if:
· the processing is carried out by a public authority;
· the core activities of the controller or the processor require “by virtue of their na -
ture, their scope and/or their purposes, regular and systematic monitoring of data 
subjects on a large scale” (Art. 37 , (1) b); or
· the core activities of the controller or the processor consist of processing, on a 
large scale, special categories of data or personal data relating to criminal convic -
tions (see special categories of data).
However, national legislation might specify further cases where there is an obligation 
to appoint a DPO. In Germany, for instance, every organisation needs to appoint a DPO 
if there are more than 10 people constantly involved with automatic processing of data. 
If the DPO is to be a member of staff, then the works council has a right of co-determi -
nation. In general, it is strongly advised to appoint a DPO even if it is not an obligation.
The DPO’s main task is to advise the controller and processors about how to comply 
with the regulation. In particular, the DPO’s roles are to:
· inform and advise the employees of the data controller or processor on their obli -
gations arising from the GDPR and any other national data protection rules;
· monitor compliance with the data protection legislation;
· check if the responsibilities of the controller and processor have correctly been as -
signed, and if awareness-raising and sufficient training for staff have taken place;
· provide advice on the data protection impact assessment and monitor its perfor -
mance;
· cooperate with the supervisory authority, and to act as a contact person for them; 
and
· be available for inquiries from data subjects (individuals whose data the controller 
possesses), for issues of data processing or where individuals want to make use of 
one of their rights (these will be discussed later).
Data protection officers can work for several organisations as long as they remain “easi -
ly accessible”. Furthermore, they can be a member of the staff or fulfil their tasks on the 
basis of a service contract.
DPOs also enjoy specific rights such as to have sufficient resources to fulfil the tasks 
assigned to them. They also have the right of access to the entities’ data processing 
personnel and operations and to training in order to “maintain their expert knowledge”. 
Moreover, data protection officers should have significant independence in carring out 
their tasks and reporting to the highest management level. They can also fulfil other 
tasks as long as there is no conflict of interest with their role as DPO. Many of the tasks 
that are assigned to the data controller (e.g. documenting processing activities etc.) can 
hence also be assumed by the DPO. Lastly, DPOs enjoy a high level of job security. They 
9cannot be fired, nor can penalties be imposed on the ground of performing their re -
sponsibilities as a DPO. There is no length of tenure for this position.
This has financial and staff implications for public authorities as well as companies 
and organisations who process a large amount of data, which may be reduced by ap -
pointing one DPO for several organisations.

10  
  How should data be processed?
The regulation sets out seven guiding principles on how data can be collected and on 
which legal basis the processing can take place. These principles can help an employee 
understand if the data their employer holds on them or on any other data subject is 
rightfully collected and processed. As the Bărbulescu v. Romania case shows, employ -
ees can rely on these principles if an employer violates their privacy.3
Guiding principles of data protection
1. Lawfulness, fairness and transparency
The reason to collect data needs to be established on a legal basis. The GDPR provides 
several grounds, such as processing based on consent, public interest or legitimate in -
terests. These different legal grounds will be discussed in the next section.
The principle of fairness applies which means that data should be handled in a way 
that people would expect to be reasonable. This includes how data has been collected. 
If somebody has been deceived to obtain their data, the data controller is in breach of 
the principle of fairness.
One needs to be transparent for example, about which data is collected, for what 
purpose, for whom and for how long it will be kept. This information needs to be writ -
ten as clearly as possible in an easily understandable language. For more information 
see the section on individual rights.
2. Purpose limitation
Personal data shall be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and can -
not be further processed in a way that is incompatible with those purposes. At least one 
of the reasons that are mentioned for the collection of data must be fulfilled in order 
to be allowed to start the processing. This means that in the context of employment 
the data controller (in this case the employer) needs to specify for which purposes the 
data on the employee is collected. Some other special conditions might apply in the 
employment context4.
However, in some instances the data can still be processed for new purposes if those 
are compatible with the original one (e.g. archiving in the public interest; scientific or 
3 European Court of Human Rights – Grand Chamber. CASE OF BĂRBULESCU v. ROMANIA. September 5, 2017. 
Accessed on July 30, 2018 http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/eng?i=001-177082
4 Cfr. in other chapters 
11historical research; and statistical purposes), providing that the data subject gives con -
sent for the new purpose or there is a new legal provision that requires processing or 
allows it in the public interest.
3. Data minimisation 
Personal data should be adequate, relevant and limited to what is necessary. The min -
imum amount of personal data that are needed for processing should be identified, 
before any data collection takes place. The data should therefore be adequate or suffi -
cient, relevant or with a clear link with the purpose and limited to fulfil the purposes for 
which they are processed.
For example, an employer may collect data on the blood type of his employees who 
do hazardous work because this information might be relevant for health and safety 
measures, even if it is unlikely to be needed. However, if the employer decides to collect 
data on the blood type of employees not doing hazardous work, this would constitute 
a breach of the principle of data minimisation.
4. Accuracy
The data needs to be accurate and kept up to date. There is an obligation on the data 
controller to proactively ensure the accuracy of data and if any of it is inaccurate, incor -
rect or misleading, then to either delete or rectify it without delay. In some cases the 
controller can rely on demands from data subjects, for instance if they want their ad -
dress to be updated in the database. In others, for example when an employee receives 
a pay rise, his or her payroll records will need to be updated.

125. Storage limitation
Personal data should be kept for a determined period of time and no longer than nec -
essary. When the purpose for keeping the data is no longer relevant or it is out of date 
the data should be deleted or anonymised. This principle prevents data from becoming 
irrelevant, excessive, inaccurate or out of date and encourages controllers to set policies 
on retention limits
6. Integrity and confidentiality
Personal data should be kept secure. Appropriate measures need to be taken to ensure 
the security of the data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful process -
ing, and against accidental loss, destruction or damage (see sections on data security).
7. Accountability
The accountability principle makes the data controller responsible and therefore ac -
countable for compliance with the GDPR, putting in place all necessary measures, such 
as the implementation of a privacy management framework.

13  Lawful basis and limits to processing      
  personal data
To collect and process data, the controller must rely on a legal basis which implies differ -
ent obligations. It is therefore helpful to be aware on which basis the data are collected.
Consent of the data subject
To be allowed to collect and process personal data, the data controller can use consent 
of the data subject to process his or her data for one or more specific purposes. It should 
be made as easy as possible to give and to withdraw consent. If the data subject’s con -
sent is given in the context of a written declaration which also concerns other matters, 
the request for consent shall be presented in a manner which is clearly distinguishable 
from the other matters. This shall be done in an intelligible and easily accessible form, 
using clear and plain language. This means that ticking a box suffices to be considered 
as an active consent to data processing. However, the box should not be pre-ticked. The 
form should also specify if any third party could be allowed to process the data and that 
the person has the right to withdraw consent at any time.
Evidence of the consent needs to be kept to show to whom, when and to what a 
person has consented. Since consent must be given freely, making it a precondition for 
the provision of services is a breach of the regulation. For example, if a service provid -
er makes consent to collect unnecessary data a precondition for providing the service 
then this is seen as an act of coercion of data subjects. Hence, in the context of employ -
ment or public service provision, where power relations are evident, the use of consent 
as a legal basis is not advised, since it could be regarded as unfair.
Explicit consent has to be obtained in situations where serious data protection risks 
emerge: on the processing of special categories of data; in the absence of adequate 
safeguards on data transfers to third countries or international organisations, and when 
there are decisions taken by technological means without human involvement (auto -
mated individual decision-making and when there is profiling.
Performance of a contract
Processing can also be allowed if it needs to be done to fulfil the purposes of a contract 
or if the person asks to take preliminary steps before entering a contract for which data 
must be collected. For example, if somebody asks for a quote for, the data controller 
does not have to ask for consent to process the data. 
The contractual basis does not have to be in written form.
Compliance with a legal obligation
If the process is necessary to comply with a legal obligation in national or EU law then 
consent is not necessary. For instance, an employer might be obliged to collect data on 
his employees on behalf of the national tax authority. In this case, the employer would 
need to document what this legal basis might be. Referring to a government site that 
explains the obligation would be considered sufficient proof.
14Protection of vital interest
When the life of a person is at stake, one is allowed to process his or her data. This ap -
plies in particular to emergency services, where medical records are needed to protect 
the person’s vital interests. However, if the person is still able to provide consent, vital 
interest cannot be used as a basis for processing. 
Legitimate interest
Legitimate interest is where one needs to show that the controller or a third-party has 
a legitimate interest to process the data and that there is no other, less intrusive way 
to achieve the same result. However, such interests cannot override the fundamental 
rights or freedoms of the data subject.
There are three steps to consider if one wants to use legitimate interests as a lawful 
basis. First, one should ask what these legitimate interests could be, how important 
they are and who benefits from them? Secondly, one should ask if there is no less in -
trusive way to achieve the same result. Thirdly, one needs to balance the interests. This 
part addresses questions such as: whether people would expect you to use their data 
in this way; whether you are happy to explain it to them; and whether some people are 
likely to object or find it intrusive. The results of these tests should be documented to 
show compliance upon request. For example, in the UK the Information Commission -
er’s Office or the Data Protection Network provide some guidance on how to carry out 
such a test. 
The GDPR specifically mentions employee or client data as one of the cases where 
data controllers can invoke legitimate interests.
Processing special categories of data 
The processing of special categories of data is prohibited unless there are specific 
grounds for doing so. This covers data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opin -
ions, religious or philosophical beliefs, or trade union membership, as well as the pro -
cessing of genetic data, biometric data for the purpose of uniquely identifying a person, 
data concerning health or data concerning a person’s sex life or sexual orientation.
The processing and collection of special categories of data is only allowed under 
special conditions:
· if no other national or European Union law prohibits the data subject from giving 
its consent to the collection of special categories of data, he or she can agree to it;
· in the context of employment or social security law, as long as national or Euro -
pean Union law or a collective agreement safeguards the fundamental rights of 
the employee;
· to protect the vital interests of the data subject or another subject if incapable of 
giving consent;
· if processing is carried out in the course of legitimate activities of foundations, 
associations or any other not-for-profit bodies with a political, philosophical, reli -
gious or trade union aim. However, the data can only relate to members, former 
members or persons who are in regular contact with the organisation and when 
it is in connection with its purpose. These data must not be disclosed outside the 
organisation without the consent of the data subject;
· when the special categories of data are made public by the data subject;
15· when the processing is necessary for the establishment or exercise of legal claims;
· “For the purposes of preventive or occupational medicine, for the assessment of 
the working capacity of the employee, medical diagnosis, the provision of health 
or social care or treatment or the management of health or social care systems 
and services.” (Art. 9 (2), h) However, the processor must in this case be subject to 
professional secrecy; or 
· when processing is necessary for substantial public interest.
Some Member States have chosen to go beyond the GDPR definition of special catego -
ries of data and have imposed additional restrictions to its processing.
Processing data on criminal offences 
Processing of data concerning criminal convictions or offences can only be carried out 
if it has a legal basis and if it meets one of these conditions:
· the processing takes place under official authority, or
· “when the processing is authorised by Union or Member State law providing for 
appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of data subjects.”
However, no register of criminal convictions or offences can be kept by a private entity.

16Processing in the context of employment
Employment constitutes a specific situation for processing personal data. By law or by 
collective agreement more specific rules to ensure the protection of “the rights and 
freedoms in respect of the processing of employees’ personal data in the employment 
context might be taken. This could be the case in particular for the purposes of the 
recruitment, the performance of the contract of employment, including discharge of 
obligations laid down by law or by collective agreements, management, planning and 
organisation of work, equality and diversity in the workplace, health and safety at work, 
protection of employer’s or customer’s property and for the purposes of the exercise 
and enjoyment, on an individual or collective basis, of rights and benefits related to 
employment, and for the purpose of the termination of the employment relationship.” 
(Art. 88)
A key aspect is to “safeguard the data subject’s human dignity, legitimate interests 
and fundamental rights, with particular regard to the transparency of processing, the 
transfer of personal data within a group of undertakings, or a group of enterprises en -
gaged in a joint economic activity and monitoring systems at the work place.”
These rules could, for instance, cover monitoring at workplace or geo-tracking. If a 
Member State takes some measures in this context, it has to communicate them to the 
European Commission in order to ensure that the new rules are compliant with the cur -
rent regulation. According to the Austrian private service trade union, GPA-djp, so far 
only Belgium, Germany, Latvia, Slovakia and Hungary have used this opening clause.5 
However, trade unions also have the possibility to take additional measures by collec -
tive agreement at company level.
In general, if a company has any monitoring provisions, the employer must inform 
the employee of its existence and they need to prove that it is an appropriate measure 
that ensures a balance with the fundamental rights and freedoms of employees.
5 Clara Fritsch. Die Europäische Datenschutzverordnung . 2nd ed. Vienna, Austria: GPA-djp, Mai 2018.
17  Individual Rights of data subjects
The GDPR provides eight clear individual rights which data subjects exercise and which 
controllers have to respect.
1. Right to be informed
Data subjects have the right to be informed in a transparent manner about what per -
sonal data are being collected and processed. The data controller needs to provide in -
formation on which data are retained for which purpose at the moment when the data 
are obtained (e.g. providing all relevant information when somebody registers through 
a form). This should be done in a precise, transparent and easily accessible way. The 
information should be written in plain language. The data subject can file a request for 
additional information that needs to be processed within a month. The reply needs to 
state for which purpose and how long the data will be stored, as well as who will have 
access to it (including any third parties). Furthermore, the data subject needs to be in -
formed that he or she has a right to access, rectify, erase or restrict the processing of his 
or her data, or to object to processing and a right to data portability.
If there is a change of purpose for the collected data, the data controller needs to 
inform the data subject of the change before any processing can take place.

182. Right to access
Data subjects have the right to obtain a copy of their personal data and other supple -
mentary information related to it. Requests can also be filed to access the collected data 
at reasonable intervals of time.6 The reply should be free of charge and should include:
· the purpose of the processing and the categories of personal data concerned;
· the recipients or categories of recipients to whom the personal data have been or 
will be disclosed, in particular recipients in third countries or international organ -
isations; 
· where possible, the envisaged period for which the personal data will be stored, 
or, if not possible, the criteria used to determine that period; 
· the existence of the right to request from the controller rectification or erasure of 
personal data or restriction of processing of personal data concerning the data 
subject or to object to such processing; 
· the right to lodge a complaint with a supervisory authority;
· where the personal data are not collected from the data subject, any available 
information as to their source; and 
· the existence of automated decision-making, including profiling and, at least in 
those cases, meaningful information about the logic involved, as well as the signif -
icance and the envisaged consequences of such processing for the data subject.
6 One can for example not ask every week to access his or her data.
193. Right to rectification
Data subjects have the right to request the rectification of their personal data or to have 
it completed. The data controller has the obligation to respond without undue delay or 
within a month of the receipt of the request. This period of time can be extended by 
two months if the request is complex. It is important to take into account that the data 
controller must provide the data to the data subject free of charge. 
4. Right to erasure
Data subjects have the right, under special circumstances to have their data erased or 
the ‘right to be forgotten’. This is the case where:
· data are no longer related to the purpose for which they were collected or pro -
cessed; 
· the data subject withdraws his or her consent (if the legal ground for processing 
was consent); 
· the data was unlawfully processed; 
· the person objects to the processing and the controller cannot demonstrate 
compelling legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests, 
rights and freedoms of the data subject (if legitimate interests were used as legal 
ground for processing); 
· the person allowed the collection of data when he/she was a child (in general de -
fined as being under 16 years old, however this depends on national legislation).
The data controller has to act upon request without undue delay and has one month to 
respond or up to three months if the request is complex.
The right to erasure does not apply if processing:
· concerns the right of freedom of expression or information; 
· is necessary to be compliant with other laws; 
· is in the public interest; 
· concerns public health; 
· is needed for the establishment of a legal claim; or 
· is done for archiving purposes in the public interest. 
The right to erasure is hence conditional. For example, Google might decline a request 
to delete an article where you no longer agree with your original statement of consent, 
since they believe that their legitimate grounds override your rights and freedoms.
5. Right to restrict processing
Data subjects have the right to request the restriction or suppression of their personal 
data. This right limits the way that the controller can use the data. This can apply when 
accuracy of data is contested and the data subject might ask to restrict access for a pe -
riod in order for the controller to verify its accuracy; in cases of unlawful processing the 
data subject can oppose the erasure and ask instead for a restriction of access. In cases 
where it is not clear that the legitimate ground for the processing by the data proces -
sor overrides the interests of the data subject (if legitimate interests were used as legal 
ground for processing), the data should be restricted during the verification of the claim. 
20The data controller can implement various measures to restrict data, for example by 
moving it for a certain period of time to another reprocessing system or website or by 
making it unavailable to other users or viewers. The data controller has one month from 
the receipt of the request to comply with it.
This right should not be confused with the right to rectification and objection, al -
though there are some linkages. 
6. Right to data portability
Data subjects have the right to move their personal data easily from one controller’s IT 
system to another. This means that they have the right to receive their personal data in 
a structured and secure format that is commonly used to be read by another machine 
or in an interoperable format and to transmit it to another data controller without hin -
drance from the first. However, this only applies if the first data controller relied on con -
sent or the performance of a contract as a lawful basis and if the processing is carried 
out by automated means. The exercise of the data portability right requires technical 
feasibility, that the IT systems and processes of the controllers are able to export and 
receive the data. The data controller has one month from the receipt of the request to 
comply with it.
This right helps the free flow of data and assists individuals in switching, for exam -
ple, between telecom providers or applications such as iTunes or Spotify, taking with 
them their data and history. It could allow, for instance, platform workers (e.g. an Uber 
driver) to get a copy of their data and get it transferred to another controller (or service 
platform), if it is technically feasible. If the conditions are met, the data on the “digital 
reputation” (reviews) could be additional personal data that can be transferred.
7. Right to object
Data subjects can, under certain circumstances, object to and stop the processing of 
their personal data. An individual can object at any time to the processing of his or 
her data if it is for direct marketing purposes. This right is not absolute, for example, 
when the controller relies on public interest or legitimate interests as a lawful basis for 
processing. The controller may no longer process the data unless it demonstrates com -
pelling legitimate grounds for the processing which override the interests, rights and 
freedoms of the data subject.
When an objection has been received, the controller must stop using and processing 
the personal data but this does not imply that the data needs to be erased. The data 
controller has one month from the receipt of the request to comply with it.
8. Rights related to automatic decision making, including 
profiling
Data subjects have the right not to be subject of automated decision making or of pro -
filing, and have the right to get enough information about the decisions made by au -
tomated means (taken without any human involvement) which have a legal impact on 
them. Practical examples are when an algorithm refuses an online financial loan appli -
21cation or in recruitment aptitude tests without human intervention when a system flags 
employees who have reached a specified number days of sick leave. 
Additionally these types of processing include ‘profiling’ which the GDPR defines as 
any form of automated processing of personal data evaluating the personal aspects 
relating to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning the 
data subject’s performance at work, economic situation, health, personal preferences 
or interests, reliability or behaviour, location or movement.
Since this type of processing implies high risks, the controller must conduct a Data 
Processing Impact Assessment to identify and manage the related risks before imple -
menting an automated decision-making process. Additionally automatic decision mak -
ing can only be used if the data subject explicitly consented to it, if it is necessary to 
enter into a contract or if it is authorised by law (e.g. to fight tax fraud). If automatic 
decision-making concerns special categories of data, it can only be carried out if the 
data subject has explicitly consented to it or if it is necessary for demonstrable reasons 
of substantial public interest. It is essential to take into account that in the exercise of 
this right, data subjects should receive meaningful information of the logic involved in 
the automated decision-making process. Controllers should take measures to prevent 
bias, discrimination and errors. The ways to receive meaningful information related to 
decisions made by algorithms need to be further investigated, as well as concerns relat -
ed to readability, intelligibility and clarity of the explanation.

22Failure to provide information
If the data controller is unable to provide the information to the data subject, they have 
one month to reply stating the reason for not taking any action. The reply should also 
inform the requesting person that he or she has the right to lodge a complaint with the 
data protection authority.
In case a request is unfounded or excessive, the data controller also has the right to 
charge a fee for providing the information or to refuse the request by further commu -
nicating this to the data subject.
Restriction of rights
These rights are not absolute and can be restricted by European Union or Member State 
law. Some of the restrictions cover primarily the public sector and will therefore be dis -
cussed in the next part. In Article 23 the GDPR provides a long list of areas in which a 
restriction can be implemented ranging from national security and defence to the pro -
tection of judicial independence and judicial proceedings.
A major improvement compared to the previous Directive 95/46/EC is the possibil -
ity to mandate a not-for-profit organisation to lodge a complaint on the behalf of the 
data subject. This opens the prospect for collective action against data controllers and 
processors. Furthermore, since the complaint will be treated at the national level, most 
collective lawsuits will probably be processed in the Member States with more advan -
tageous collective action rules.
23  Data security
Data privacy and security are interlinked and security needs to be systematically built 
into and implemented in the organisation. There is a need for physical security in the 
premises, workstations, video-surveillance cameras, etc and security of the systems, in -
cluding the internal network, mobile equipment, servers, websites, etc.
Data protection by design and by default
These are two principles in the GDPR and both responsibility of the data controller. 
Data protection by design  is about the capacity to apply technical and organisational 
measures, including an ethical dimension, appropriate and effective to ensure privacy. 
The European Data Protection authority clarifies that processing of personal data, 
partially or completely supported by IT systems should always be the outcome of a 
design project. 
Data protection by default  requires the controller by default, to collect and process 
only personal data that are necessary for each specific purpose of the processing, in 
compliance with the law and transparently notified to the data subjects concerned. 
Hence, data subjects do not have to make ‘extra efforts’ to protect their own privacy.

24Data controllers need to be proactive and preventative and take measures to safe -
guard data. They should, for example, anonymise data on a technical as well as organ -
isational level and provide permanent protection to personal data. The encryption of 
personal data and provision of delete functionalities - guaranteeing that the data is 
only accessible to a restricted set of people - should be taken both at the time of the 
determination of the means for processing and at the time of the processing itself “by 
design”.
On the organisational level, the controller needs to ensure that all employees deal -
ing with the processing of data receive sufficient information about the risks and have 
training on the new data protection rules. The seven data-protection principles should 
provide guidance on which data can be collected. 
Data controllers need to be able to ensure the ongoing confidentiality, integrity, avail -
ability and resilience of processing systems and services, and to restore the availability 
and access to personal data in a timely manner in the event of a physical or technical 
incident. A process must be put in place for regularly testing, assessing and evaluating 
the effectiveness of technical and organisational measures for ensuring the security of 
the processing.
The processor and controller should assess the scope, context and purpose of pro -
cessing and any costs for implementation before implementing new security measures.
Contracts
The data protection by design and default provision does also apply any (third-party) 
processor. Hence, the data controller should establish a contract with any processor, 
stating the responsibilities and liabilities of both parties, the legal basis for the data pro -
cessing and giving guidance about which data can be processed and for which purpose.

25Documentation
In case an organisation is employing more than 250 persons, or when the processing is 
likely to result in a risk to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, the processing 
is not occasional, the processing includes special categories of data or data in relation 
to criminal convictions or offences, the organisation needs to document the processing 
activities under its responsibility.
While it is best for the data controller to document all the processing activities, safe -
guard mechanisms, records of consent and location of data etc., the GDPR only pro -
vides for some obligations which can be consulted in article 30 of the regulation.
If employees/data subjects want to make use of their rights deriving from the regu -
lation, documentation allows them to get a better picture of what is processed and for 
which reason. 
Data protection impact assessment (DPIA)
This is an important document to issue when there is a high risk to a person’s rights 
and freedoms, including the potential for any significant social or economic disadvan -
tage. Before any processing, the controller shall conduct an assessment of the impact 
of the envisaged processing operation on the protection of personal data. Furthermore, 
a data protection impact assessment (DPIA) is necessary if the data controller or pro -
cessor makes systematic and extensive use of profiling, processes special categories of 
data on a large scale or systematically monitors publicly accessible places. The national 
data protection authority shall provide a list of the kind of processing operations for 
which a DPIA is required. It is crucial for the controller to seek the views of data subjects 
or their representatives on the intended processing and works and staff councils might 
therefore want a role in the DPIA process.
The data protection officer should provide advice on how to reduce the risks to data 
protection. When the data controller identifies a high risk, which cannot be mitigated, 
he or she has to consult the national data protection authority. The Data Protection 
Working Party7 gives some additional guidance when a DPIA is needed and how to con -
duct it.8 Guidelines on other provisions can also be consulted on the Article 29 Working 
Party’s webpage.9
A DPIA is, for instance, an obligation when an employer wants to introduce geo-track -
ing technology or to collect data on employees’ trade union membership. In general, 
when (new) technologies or software need employees’ personal data for processing, 
the data controller is advised to conduct a DPIA. 
7 The Data Protection Working Party is established by Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC. It provides the European 
Commission with independent advice on data protection matters and helps in the development of harmonised 
policies for data protection in the EU Member States.
8 Article 29 Working Party Guidelines on Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) and determining whether 
processing is ‘likely to result in a high risk’ for the purposes of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, 4 April 2017
9 Article 29 Working Party “Guidelines”, accessed on 18.07.2018. http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/news.
cfm?item_type=1360&tpa_id=6936
26Data breach
A data breach is any unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, 
or access to, personal data. It can take several forms, ranging from a loss of data (e.g. 
theft of a computer or mobile phone) to hacking of servers. Under the GDPR every 
data breach that implies risks to personal rights and freedoms, needs to be reported 
to the supervisory authority, irrespective to when it took place (e.g. a data breach 
might be undiscovered for a few months, yet as soon as it is detected it needs to be 
reported). The terms of employment might specify the procedure on how to act in 
case of a breach.
Controllers and processors need to develop a security breach response plan and im -
plement policy accordingly. When a data breach happens, the employee, data subject, 
data processors and data protection officer need to immediately (within 72 hours) in -
form the controller as soon as they detect the breach, independent of the scope of the 
breach. The controller must then assess the severity of the breach and might need to 
inform the supervisory authority and the data subjects whose data have been compro -
mised. 
The latter can also be done by a public announcement if it is too complex to reach 
out to every data subject. If the responsible authorities are not notified within 72 hours, 
the data controller needs to provide a reasonable justification (e.g. disruption to regular 
business operations etc.) for the delay.
The notification to the supervisory authorities and affected data subjects should in -
clude which data have been accessed, how many people are concerned by the breach, 
the name of the data protection officer, what the possible consequences could be, and 
what will be done to mitigate the breach. 

27Ensuring compliance
There are several ways for data controllers to improve compliance by adopting addi -
tional safeguards.
Codes of conduct
The GDPR provides the possibility for associations or other bodies representing cat -
egories of controllers or processors to conclude sectoral codes of conduct which can 
apply on national and, if needed, on European level. Organisations that are established 
outside the EU can also choose to adhere to a code of conduct on a contractual and 
binding basis.
The codes of conduct need to cover the GDPR rules to ensure compliance with the 
regulation and can introduce additional restrictions if the sector covers “high risk” data. 
The draft code of conduct needs to be sent to the supervisory authority which will pro -
vide an opinion. If sufficient measures have been taken to safeguard data protection it 
will approve and publish the code of conduct. If it concerns several Member States this 
role should fall to the European Data Protection Board10.
Binding corporate rules
Companies can agree on internal binding corporate rules, which apply to every entity 
of the company. These rules are in general drafted by the employer and only need ap -
proval by the supervisory authority. After approval, the company can start to transfer 
data to their different entities.
Certification
The European Data Protection Board and the national supervisory authorities also have 
the possibility to accredit certification bodies. Organisations can demonstrate their 
compliance by adhering to these certificates.
Independent supervisory authority
The powers and competences of national data protection agencies have increased with 
the new regulation. They can now ban some kinds of data processing or impose fines. 
Furthermore, cooperation between the different authorities has also been strength -
ened. Their aim is first and foremost to monitor and enforce the Regulation. See the 
section on independent supervisory authorities in the GDPR and the Public Sector for 
further details.
10 The European Data Protection Board (EDPB) is an independent European body, which contributes to the 
consistent application of data protection rules throughout the European Union, and promotes cooperation 
between the EU’s data protection authorities. The EDPB is composed of representatives of the national data 
protection authorities, and the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS).
28  Liability
Fines
The GDPR allows for the imposition of fines of up to 20 million Euro or 4% of the annual 
turnover of a company. However, this is only the case when the company or organisa -
tion repeatedly breaks the law on data protection and is benefiting from doing so. The 
imposition of fines depends among other things on the severity of the breach, coopera -
tion with authorities, measures taken to mitigate it and number of people affected by it. 
National data protection authorities will prefer to issue a warning or an order on how to 
resolve the problem without imposing fines in case of a minor breach of the regulation.
A data subject has the right to demand compensation from the controller or proces -
sor for any material or non-material damage.
Data controller
In general, the data controller is always liable for any non-compliance. Under the GDPR 
the liability can seldom be transferred to the data protection officer, who only assumes 
an advisory role. However, this is quite controversial. In some instances liability can be 
transferred to the data processor, while in others both might be liable.
If the controller or processor can prove that they are not responsible for the damage, 
they cannot be held liable. The 2017 case against the UK supermarket chain Morrisons 
showed that even in the case of a deliberate data breach by an employee, the employer 
is liable.11
Data processor
Since the processor is the natural person or organisation that processes data on behalf 
of the controller, the processor is only liable if he or she did not comply with the GDPR 
on processing or acted outside the instructions of the controller. For contracts, this can, 
for instance, be the case if he or she used sub-contractors without authorisation from 
the controller, did not cooperate with the authority, did not ensure the safety measures 
or did not keep records of processing activities etc.
Joint and several liability
When both the processor and the controller or more than one controller or processor 
caused the data breaches, each of them is liable for the entire damage. They can never -
theless claim back a part of the compensation from the other processor or controllers 
corresponding to their share of responsibility for the damage.
Data protection officer
While the GDPR does not state that the data protection officer can be held liable for his 
or her action, legal opinion is divided on this question. The International Association of 
Privacy Professionals believes that national laws on data protection that include a crimi -
nal liability of DPOs in case of non-compliance are compatible with the GDPR. In Ireland, 
11  Sarah Butler, “Morrisons Found Liable for Staff Data Leak in Landmark Ruling,” The Guardian, 1 December 2017, 
accessed July 17, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/dec/01/morrisons-liable-staff-data-leak-
landmark-decision
29DPOs can personally be criminally liable if they consent to the violation while in the UK, 
they are liable if it is proved that they provided false advice.
Thiébaut Devergranne, professor of IT law, deems that even without additional legal 
grounds, courts might create a civil liability for DPOs.12 He gives as examples where the 
DPO might have had knowledge about a problem without reporting it to the controller 
or was completely incompetent. These would constitute cases of grave misconduct and 
any protections for the DPO would not apply. Further court rulings on this issue will be 
needed to clarify liability issues.
Employee
As the data controller is in general liable for any damages, an employee is usually not 
personally accountable. However, as the Morrisons case shows, when a breach of the 
regulation happens on purpose, the employee causing the breach might still face a 
criminal conviction and face dismissal.
Similar cases involving criminal offences committed by the employee may not fall 
under the data protection regulation. It is therefore hard to estimate the real impact 
on employees who unintentionally cause a breach. Some questions therefore still need 
to be addressed. For example, if an employee can be held liable for a data breach then 
does an employee of a controller (who does the work of a data controller) have a higher 
liability than an employee of a processor? On what grounds can he or she be held liable? 
The GDPR is still lacking answers to these important questions.
12  Thiébaut Devergranne. “Answer to: Who is insuring Data Protection Officers for GDPR liability?” Quora. April 
23, 2018. Accessed July 25, 2018. https://www.quora.com/Who-is-insuring-Data-Protection-Officers-for-GDPR-
liability/answer/Thi%C3%A9baut-Devergranne-1
30  The GDPR and the public sector
The regulation differentiates between public authorities or bodies and processing car -
ried out in the public interest by private entities. The latter are, for instance, allowed to 
process data for archiving purposes in the public interest, however they are not permit -
ted to hold a comprehensive register of criminal convictions. This illustrates that some 
special provisions apply to public authorities or bodies which cannot be transferred to 
private entities.
This chapter covers the notion of public interest and the special provisions and der -
ogations for public authorities or bodies. The increased responsibilities of the data pro -
tection authority will also be discussed. It should be noted that all of the provisions of 
the GDPR still apply and that the following points should only be considered as special 
derogations.
Public interest
The notion of public interest is not specified in the regulation and will therefore depend 
on the specific context and national practice. However, the GDPR does allow for some 
leeway in processing for both public and private actors when the purpose is in the pub -
lic interest:
· The principle of purpose limitation (no further processing of data if it is incompat -
ible with the purpose for which it was collected) does not apply if processing data 
takes place “for archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical re -
search purposes or statistical purposes.” In this case data can be stored for longer 
periods if the principle of data minimisation is upheld. Furthermore, the rights of 
the data subjects do not apply if they render the purpose impossible or seriously 
impair the achievement of it. 
· The same applies for special categories of data if there is a legal ground in Europe -
an Union or Member State law.
· There can be a legal basis if “processing is necessary for the performance of a task 
in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller” 
(Art. 6 (1) e). 
· Processing of special categories of data is also permitted as long as the public 
interest is “substantial” and if it has a legal basis in European Union or Member 
State law.
· For reasons of public interest in the area of public health, processing of special 
categories of data is permissible. Yet again, a legal ground in European Union or 
Member State law is required that sufficiently safeguards fundamental rights and 
freedoms.
Member States may require controllers to consult with the data protection authority if 
they want to be authorised to use public interest as a lawful basis.
Important reasons of public interest can also be invoked to transfer data to a third 
country without having a prior assessment by the European Commission of the safe -
guards for the data. However, this public interest must be recognised by European Un -
ion or Member State law.
31Finally, if one wants to issue a complaint the “one-stop-shop mechanism15” does not 
apply for public authorities or private bodies who act in the public interest. Only the 
data protection authority where the public or private body is established should be 
competent for these cases.
Public authorities or bodies
There are two types of derogations for public authorities or bodies. They are either reg -
ulated by other laws (the GDPR does not apply) or they can process data and exercise 
rights which are prohibited for private entities.
The following cases are not regulated by the GDPR:
· EU institutions and agencies are regulated by the Regulation (EC) No 45/2001.
· When public administrations collect data in the framework of a particular inves -
tigation in accordance with a legal obligation for the exercise of their official mis -
sion, the GDPR does not apply. This is for instance for inquiries by tax and customs 
authorities, financial investigation units, independent administrative authorities, 
or financial market authorities responsible for the regulation and supervision of 
securities markets.
· If the authorities can demonstrate that processing takes place in the context of 
the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy.
· Data is collected and processed for the purpose “of the prevention, investigation, 
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penal -
ties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public 
security.” In these cases the EU Directive 2016/680 applies.

32In addition to the above-mentioned derogations relating to public interest, special pro -
visions are granted to public authorities where there is no need for consent for the 
processing of data when “processing is necessary for the performance of a task carried 
out in the public interest or in the exercise of official authority vested in the controller”. 
However, the public authority needs to demonstrate that processing is in the “public 
interest” and falls within its legal competences. This is a clear difference from the “le -
gitimate interest” clause for private entities. It does not suffice for a public institution 
to claim legitimate grounds for data processing if they cannot demonstrate that it is 
in line with the public interest. For example, is the collection and diffusion of (e-mail) 
addresses by government agencies strictly necessary for carrying out their tasks within 
their legal competences?
There is also a derogation for courts that act in their judicial capacity to process spe -
cial categories of data.
Only public authorities are allowed to keep a comprehensive register of criminal con -
victions under their control. 
Member States can choose whether and to which extent public authorities should 
be subject to administrative fines.
However, public authorities also have an obligation that doesn’t apply to private en -
tities: the appointment of a data protection officer who will advise them on how to en -
sure compliance. Taking into account public authorities/bodies organisational structure 
and size, a DPO can be appointed by several institutions at the same time. This might 
help share the financial costs of the appointment. Only courts acting in their judicial 
capacity are exempted from appointing a DPO.

33Independent supervisory authority
While it is not necessarily a new obligation, Member States need to have one or more 
independent data protection supervisory authorities and to designate one of them as 
the lead authority, to be represented in the European Data Protection Board. The inde -
pendence of the supervisory authority is paramount and members of the authority are 
therefore not allowed to take on any occupation that is incompatible with their position 
as a member of the authority. Member States also have to provide data protection au -
thorities with sufficient human, financial and technical resources necessary to carry out 
their tasks.
Data protection authority members benefit from a high degree of job security. Their 
duties only end in the event of the expiry of the term of office, resignation, compulsory 
retirement or in cases of serious misconduct. Members are furthermore subject to pro -
fessional secrecy rules.
Since the scope of the GDPR has increased compared to previous data protection 
law, the tasks and powers of the supervisory authority have also increased. Their main 
task is to monitor and enforce the Regulation as well as to handle complaints. Addition -
ally, they are allowed to conduct investigations, give advice on processing and raise 
public awareness on the subject of data protection. The full list of tasks can be found in 
Article 57 of the Regulation. They have powers to order the controller or processor to 
hand over any information required to perform their task as a data protection authority, 
to issue warnings or reprimands to a controller or processor if processing is (likely) to 
infringe the regulation and to accredit certification bodies. The list of supervisory au -
thority powers is substantially longer than in the previous regulation and is set out in 
Article 58 of the GDPR.
A major improvement on previous regulations is the one-stop-shop mechanism and 
the increased cooperation of different supervisory authorities. The one-stop-mecha -
nism allows a data subject to lodge a complaint in the Member State where the main 
establishment of a private entity is based. This data protection authority will then take 
the lead in a case which can cover all foreign branches of the private entity. The lead 
authority will have to cooperate with the other data protection authorities where the 
company has activities to seek agreement on how to proceed. If they do not manage 
to find a consensus, the case goes to the European data protection board which will 
take a binding decision how to interpret the GDPR. Cooperation is also strengthened 
by imposing a deadline of one month for a reply to another supervisory authority and 
by creating rules for joint operations.
34  Guidelines on compliance 
  for trade unions
The GDPR impacts trade unions in several ways and also provides news rights and pro -
visions that unions can benefit from. Unions need to know how to benefit from them 
while taking measures to ensure compliance. Some of the suggested measures below 
might already be included in your trade union practice:
On data collection and mapping:
1) A good way to start would be to organize an information session on the GDPR  
for union staff and people who are directly involved in data processing.
2) Identify the data protection officer and ask him or her to help you to identify 
crucial trade union issues in your specific organisation or workplace. 
3) When new data are collected, the trade union shall ask for explicit consent  to 
process it for the specified purposes. 
4) There is no need to ask for consent for data already collected if the trade union 
can show that consent was given at the time of collection (self-inscription to the 
mailing list/membership form etc.). In some cases they can also rely on their le -
gitimate interests as a trade union as a legal basis (e.g. newsletter). However, if no 
legal basis for the data can be established it is best to delete the data. 
5) There is a prohibition on collecting special categories of personal data. Howev -
er, information on racial ethnicity, health, age, allergies/diary preferences of par -
ticipants for a conference may be shared at an aggregated level, in order to avoid 
handing out personal information. For instance: “Among the 10 participants at 
the conference 3 are vegetarians”.
6) Check with the national data protection authority at what age a person is no 
longer considered a child , this may vary between 13 and 16 years, depending 
on Member State legislation. Where a trade union holds data on children, it needs 
the active consent of their parents.
7) The union needs to make an inventory of which personal data the union pos -
sesses  on its members, affiliates, supporters etc. and with whom this data is shared.
On data security:
8) Identify the risks  that might impact your particular organisation, minimise  
them and educate  employees about how to prevent them.
9) Develop a comprehensive privacy and security programme  for the organisa -
tion, ensuring confidentiality and protecting it from unauthorised access.
10) Create a secure (password protected or encrypted) database , limit the peo -
ple who have access to it and store it in a secure place, in a protected server with 
limited access. Put the focus on special categories of data, which should in many 
instances only be collected if in line with the aims of the trade union (see special 
categories of data).
3511)  Raise awareness on phishing (spam) , communicating the risks frequently to 
staff
12) Draft a plan to follow when breaches occur.
13) Evaluate your providers  in terms of security
On technical measures:
1) Make sure that the relevant technical and organisational measures are put in place 
(such as auditing and testing) and be aware of those that cannot be put in place 
and understand the justification for that. 
On policies and procedures:
2) Identify the applicable laws and regulations at European and national level as well 
as any opinions from authorities and data protection practices. 
3) Review the privacy notices and policies  that are shown at the moment when 
data are collected (e.g. registration form). The retention period and the specific 
purpose of data collection need to be stated at this point as well as the rights of 
data subjects. The users/members need to be informed about any change in the 
privacy terms.
4) Write an internal procedure  that clearly explains how, why and for what peri -
od of time personal data are stored and how processed. The procedure should 
cover all individual rights (see rights of the data subject), how the trade union 
will handle different requests and who will be responsible for dealing with them. 
This should also include how to react in the case of a data breach. The internal 
procedure needs to state the name of the data controller , data processor  (and 
if applicable the data protection officer ) who will be responsible for applying 
the new rules.
5) Write a review the privacy policy  and publish it on the website. The privacy 
policy should follow the principle of lawful processing. It should include the fol -
lowing elements:
a. What data are collected?
b. For which purpose?
c. For how long?
d. How are they collected?
e. How are they processed?
f. How is the process carried out?
g. Is it likely that this data will be processed in any other way in the future 
and, if so, how?
h. How can data subjects exercise their rights?
i. With whom is the data shared?
j. What safeguards have been put in place? 
The principle of data minimisation applies here and it is therefore best to reduce the 
number of third party processors. It is suggested to avoid using social media plugins for 
the website or to only use those that do not collect any data on visitors.
366) If need be conduct a data protection impact assessment.
7) Make a list of the practices that should be avoided . Such as sharing data and 
passwords.
8) Trade unions as employers need to respect the GDPR when processing data on 
their employees.
Practical recommendations on data protection
Keeping data safe is the utmost priority. In order to protect data subjects and avoid any 
data breaches it is best to consider the following recommendations:
1) Make sure employees have constant and sufficient information and training . 
2) Make sure there are data protection policies in the organisation , including 
security measures and protection of employment and staffing data.
3) Protect passwords on all computers, laptops and other devices and regularly 
change them. Lock them away over night.
4) Store paper records in locked cabinets  and keep them out of view of visitors.
5) Regularly update software  and anti-virus programmes.
6) Encrypt all the databases  and documents with special categories of data such 
as union membership.
7) Adopt good practices. Send emails to mailing lists or put the email addresses of 
the receivers into the blind copy (BCC) field .
8) Secure your websites  and if cookies are required collect consent.
9) Develop a more anonymous approach of your data. Anonymise (un-link data) 
or delete files as soon as possible. If you create case files you can state either as 
legal basis that it falls under the trade union’s legitimate activities or that it is used 
for legal claims. However, the safety of this data needs to be ensured and after the 
case is closed it should either be erased or anonymised.
10) Make sure employers are aware of their responsibilities as controllers.
1 1) Know when to contact the Supervisory Authority
Help us to keep the focus on the GDPR
Upon the rollout of GDPR, many trade unions and shop stewards were left wondering 
what they needed to do. Numerous public and private entities were slow to take action, 
and in spring 2018, most of them were not prepared for the new legislation. Since the 
GDPR compliance deadline of 25 May 2018, we have been trying to reach out to trade 
unions in public services to ask them to share the steps they took while starting the pro -
cess as well as any practical GDPR case studies, problems and challenges encountered 
in their daily work. For this reason, if you have concrete questions, examples of good 
or bad practices to share or are looking for guidance in dealing with the GDPR, you can 
write to gdpr@epsu.org . 
37  Further information and reading
The General Data Protection Regulation: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/
TXT/?qid=1465452422595&uri=CELEX:32016R0679
Article 29 Working Party “Guidelines”: http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/article29/news.
cfm?item_type=1360&tpa_id=6936
Buffard, Sally, The General Data Protection Regulation – a practical guide for trade 
unionists,  Labour Research Department Booklets, March 2018
Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés, Security of Personal Data. The 
CNIL Guides 2018, France, www.cnil.fr  
European Trade Union Committee for Education (ETUCE), “ETUCE’s guidelines on the 
new EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)”, May 2018, https://www.csee-
etuce.org/images/attachments/GDPR-guidelines-2018.pdf  
Fritsch, Clara. „Die Europäische Datenschutzverordnung.“ 2nd ed. Vienna, Austria: GPA-
djp, Mai 2018
Information Commissioner’s Office, Guide to the General Data Protection Regulation, 
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-
gdpr/
38

39

EPSU is the European Federation of Public Service Unions.  It is the 
largest federation of the ETUC and comprises 8 million public service 
workers from over 260 trade unions across Europe. EPSU organises 
workers in the energy, water and waste sectors, health and social services 
and local, regional and central government, in all European countries 
including the EU’s Eastern Neighbourhood. It is the recognised regional 
organisation of Public Services International (PSI). For more information 
please go to: www.epsu.org