Go-Cort, Inc. Vendor Management Policy
 
Last Update Status: Updated January 2021
 
 
 
1.
Overview
 
The Go-Cort, Inc. (DBA Apptoto) Vendor Management Team is tasked with employing the right
 
vendors and contractors, in line with the organization’s financial, corporate, and security focused
 
objectives. The team shall establish a coordinated plan and program for information technology
 
(IT) implemented and maintained through established Go-Cort, Inc. policies, standards and
 
procedures. All interactions with vendors should include a clear paper, digital, and audit trail.
 
 
2.
Purpose
 
The purpose of this program is to smoothly manage the vendor relationship and ensure the
 
partnership is productive, meets security requirements, and contributes to the financial goals of
 
the business. The team is responsible for overseeing seven pillars of Vendor Management:
 
2.1.
Vendor Selection. It’s essential to have a strong process for selecting new vendors as
 
needed. This may entail requesting and reviewing fundamental business documents like
 
OFAC checks and secretary of state checks.
 
 
2.2.
Risk Assessment. Determine the risk and potential business impact of a vendor, product
 
or service. Any regulatory risk is essential to evaluating the overall risk a vendor poses to
 
the organization.
 
 
2.3.
Due Diligence. Request essential due diligence documents, like a SOC report, financials,
 
business continuity and disaster recovery documentation.
 
 
2.4.
Contractual Standards. Develop thorough standard contract terms and conditions before
 
entering contract negotiations. Keep it fair and reasonable for both parties.
 
 
2.5.
Reporting. Standard reporting should be developed for all lines of the business and
 
management team.
 
 
2.6.
Ongoing Monitoring. This is a valuable best practice and a regulatory expectation.
 
Analyze vendors according to an annual calendar, not just during vendor vetting, to help
 
eliminate concerns.
 
 
2.7.
Exit Strategy. A predetermined course of action for terminating a vendor relationship is in
 
place prior to contracting.
 
 
3.
Scope
 
This policy applies to all contracts with third-party providers that:
 
●
have a critical impact on the success of strategic projects and services
 
●
have an expected duration of six or more months
 
●
carry significant risk to the Go-Cort, Inc. business or its customers
 
●
play a vital role in operations
 
●
may be difficult to change in the short term
 
1
 
●
require continuous monitoring
 
●
have complex dispute and problem-solving mechanisms
 
●
access or manage substantial critical or sensitive data
 
 
4.
Roles and Responsibilities
 
4.1.
The Apptoto Vendor Management Team shall be ultimately responsible for the correct
 
and thorough completion of IT policies, standards, and procedures.
 
 
4.2.
Appointed members of the Team shall:
 
●
be responsible for the development of requirements
 
●
support vendor selection and contract negotiation
 
●
ensure that the vendor agreement is conducted per the contract
 
●
communicate the status of the contract to stakeholders in a timely manner
 
●
establish service level agreement standards and monitor performance against
 
these
 
●
ensure that key risks are identified and monitored
 
●
ensure that problems, issues, disputes and other matters are resolved timely
 
●
ensure that the contract termination and transition is performed effectively and
 
efficiently
 
 
 
5.
Policy Compliance
 
5.1.
Compliance Measurement
 
Go-Cort, Inc. will verify compliance to this policy through various methods, including but
 
not limited to, business tool reports, internal and external audits, and feedback from
 
employees.
 
 
 
5.2.
Exceptions
 
Any exception to the policy must be approved by Go-Cort, Inc. in advance.
 
 
 
5.3.
Non-Compliance
 
Failure to comply with this policy may result in disciplinary action, up to and including
 
termination.
 
 
6.
Revision History
 
 
 
2
 
Date of Change
 
Responsible
 
Summary of Change
 
November 2020
 
Frank Cort
 
Adopted and customized to apptoto.com
 
January 2021
 
Frank Cort
 
Customized to Go-Cort, Inc. (DBA Apptoto)