https://crsreports.congress.gov  
 
Updated October 12, 2022
Data Protection and Privacy  Law: An Introduction
Recent controversy surrounding how third parties protect 
the privacy of individuals in the digital age  has raised 
national concerns over legal protections of Americans ’ 
electronic data.  The current legislative paradigms governing 
cybersecurity and data privacy are complex and technical 
and lack uniformity at the federal level. This In  Focus 
provides an introduction to  data protection laws and an 
overview of considerations for Congress.  (For a more 
detailed analysis, see CRS Report R45631, Data Protection 
Law: An Overview , by Stephen P. Mulligan, Wilson C. 
Freeman, and Ch ris D. Linebaugh .)   
Defining Data Protection  
As a legislative concept, data protection  melds the fields of 
data privacy  (i.e., how to control the collect ion, use, and 
dissemination of personal information) and data security  
(i.e., how to protect personal information from  unauthorized 
access or use and  respond to such unauthorized access or 
use). Historically, many laws addressed these issues 
separately, but more recent data protection initiatives 
indicate a trend toward combining data pri vacy and security 
into unified legislative schemes.  
Federal Data Protection Laws  
While the Supreme Court has interpreted the Constitution to 
provide individuals with a right to privacy, this right 
generally guards only against government intrusions. Given 
the limitations in constitutional law, Congress has enacted a 
number of federal laws designed to provide statutory 
protections of individuals’ personal information. However,  
these statutory protections ar e not comprehensive in nature  
and primarily regulate certain indust ries and subcategories 
of data . These laws —which  differ based on their scope, 
who enforces the m, and the ir associated  penalties —include:  
 Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act : provides 
data protection requirements for children’s information 
collected by online operators.  
 Communications Act of 1934 : includes data protection 
provisions for common carriers, cable operators, and 
satellite carriers.   
 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act : prohibits the 
unauthorized access of protect ed computers.  
 Consumer Financial Protection Act : regulates unfair, 
deceptive, or abusive acts in connection with consumer 
financial products or services.  
 Electronic Communications Privacy Act : prohibits 
the unauthorized access or interception of electron ic 
communications in storage or transit.  
 Fair Credit Reporting Act : covers the collection and 
use of data contained in consumer reports.   Federal Securities Laws : may require data security 
controls and data breach reporting responsibilities.   
 Federal Trade  Commission (FTC) Act : prohibits 
unfair o r deceptive acts or practices.  
 Gramm -Leach -Bliley Act : regulates  financial 
institutions ’ use of  nonpublic personal information .  
 Health Insurance Portability  and Accountability Act : 
regulates health care providers’ collection and 
disclosure  of protected health information.   
 Video Privacy Protection Act : provides privacy 
protections related to video rental and streaming.  
Of these laws, the  FTC Act’s prohibition of “unfair or 
deceptive acts or  practices” (UDAPs) is e specially 
important in the context of data protection.  The FTC has 
brought hundreds of enforcement actions based on the 
allegation that companies’ data protection prac tices violated 
this prohibition . One of the well-settled  principle s in FTC 
practice is that companies are bound by their data privacy 
and data security promises.  The FTC has taken the position 
that companies act deceptively  when they handle  personal 
information in a way that contradicts their posted privacy 
policies  or other statements  or when they fail to adequately 
protect personal information from unauthorized access 
despite promises that they would do so. In addition to 
broken  promises, the FTC has maintained that certain data 
protection practices are unfair , such as when companies 
have default privacy settings that are difficult to change or 
when companies retroactively apply revised privacy 
policies . However, w hile the FTC’s enforcement of the 
UDAP prohibition fills in some statutory gaps in federal 
data protection law , its authori ty has limits.  In contrast to 
many of the sector -specific data protection laws , the FTC 
Act does not require  companies to abide by specific data 
protection policies or practices and has historically been 
interpreted not to reach entities that have not made  explicit 
promises concerning data protection . In August 2022, the 
FTC issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking and 
request for public comment ( 87 FR 51273) on whether it 
should implement more comprehensive  data protection 
regulations.  
State Data Protection Laws  
Adding to the complex patchwork of federal laws, some 
states have developed their own statutory framework s for 
data protection. Every state has passed some form of data 
breach response legislation, and m any states have consumer 
protection l aws of various types. In addition, California 
created one of the first state -level  comprehensive data 
protection regime s through the Califor nia Consumer 
Privacy Act (CCPA) . 
Data Protection and Privacy Law: An Introduction  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  The CCPA  governs  any company doing business in 
California that meets certain minimu m thresholds, 
including companies with websites accessible there . The 
law provides consumers with three main “rights. ” First, 
consumers have a right to know  information that businesses 
have collected or sold about them, requiring business es to 
inform consu mers  about the personal data being collected. 
Second, the CCPA provides consumers with a right to opt 
out of the sale of their personal information. Third, the 
CCPA gives consumers the right, in certain cases , to 
request that a business delete any information collected 
about the consumer (i.e., right to delete ). The CCPA is 
enforced via civil penalties in enforcement actions brought 
by the California attorney general.  
Foreign  Data Protection Law  
In addition to  U.S. states such as California , some foreign 
nations  have enacted comprehensive data protection 
legislation.  The EU, in particular, has long applied a more 
wide -ranging data protection regulatory scheme , and its 
data protection law, the General Data Protection Regulat ion 
(GDPR), has served as a model for other jurisdictions 
developing data protection policy.  The GDPR requires any 
entity that proces ses personal data to identify a legal basis 
for its action  (such as consent or “legitimate interests”) , and 
it enumerates e ight data privacy rights afforded to 
individuals. The regulation also includes data breach 
notification requirements, data security standards, and 
conditions for cross -border data flows outside the EU.  
Issues for Congress  
Data protection policy proposals  are constantly evolving, 
and there is no agreed -upon menu of data protection 
options . Depending on the contours of a particular proposal, 
federal -level data protection legislation could implicate 
various legal concerns, including constitutional limitations .  
Conceptual Issues . A primary conceptual point of debate 
in data protection policy is whether to use a “prescriptive” 
approach in which the law defines data protection rules and 
obligations or an “outcome -based” model  where  legislation 
focuses on the outcomes of organizational practices rather 
than dictating what those practices should be. Both the 
GDPR and the CCPA use a prescriptive approach, but some 
observers advocate for an outcome -based paradigm. 
Another overarching iss ue is how to define the contours of 
the data that the federal government proposes to protect  or 
the specific entities or industries that it proposes to regulate. 
Whereas some federal proposals w ould cover all “personal” 
information, others have sought to a void dual layers of 
regulation by stating that the proposed requirements would 
not apply if regulated by  existing federal privacy law.  
Enforcement. Agency enforcement is another key issue. 
There are multiple federal agencies responsible for 
enforcing the m yriad federal data protection laws , such as 
the FTC, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau , Federal 
Communications  Commission , and Department of Health 
and Human Services . Of these agencies, t he FTC is often 
viewed as the leading data protection enforcement  agency given its significant experience. However, there are several 
legal constraints on its enforcement ability. In particular,  
the FTC cannot seek monetary penalties for first -time 
UDAP violations  but may seek only cease -and-desist order s 
or injunctions . It may generally seek only civil penalties 
after a company has violated a cease -and-desist order or 
settlement agreement. The FTC also lacks juri sdiction over 
certain entities  including banks, nonprofits, and common 
carriers.  
Federalism  and Preemption . Another legal issue Congress 
may need to consider with respect to any federal data 
protection program is how to structure the federal -state 
regime —that is, how to balance whatever federal program 
is enacted with the programs and policies in the states.  If 
Congress seeks to adopt a relatively comprehensive system 
for data protection, Congress could expressly preempt many 
state law s related to a particular subject matter . Congress 
could alternatively take a more modest approach to state 
law by expressly prese rving state laws in some ways and 
preempting them in others. Congress has the option to 
generally leave intact state schemes parallel to or narrower 
than the federal scheme or to render such parallel regulation 
invalid.  
First Amendment. Although legislatio n on data protection 
could take many forms, several  approaches that would 
regulate  the collection , use,  and dissemination of personal 
information online may have to confront possible 
limitations imposed by the First Amendment  of the U.S. 
Constitution . Whil e the Supreme Court has recognized that 
data protection regulation can  implicate the First 
Amendment, this does not mean such laws would be 
invalid. Instead, the validity of a given information privacy 
law may depend upon the nature of the law it regulates  
(e.g., commercial matters can be subject to less scrutiny 
from a court) and whether the law  singles out  particular 
viewpoint s or speakers  for regulation . 
Private Rights of Action. Finally, Congress may seek to 
estab lish a private right of action allowing  a private plaintiff 
to bring a lawsuit  based on a violation of  the new data 
protection law . However, it may be difficult to prove that 
someone has been harmed by many of the violations that 
might occur under a hypothetical data protection regime. 
Victims of data breaches and other privacy violations, 
generally speaking, are not always clearly harmed . This 
obstacle could run up against the limits of the federal 
courts’ “judicial power” under Article III of the U.S. 
Constitution.  Any federal private right of  action, therefore, 
would be limited in its application to cases in which 
individuals can show a concrete and particularized harm 
from a statutory violation.  
Stephen P. Mulligan , Legislative Attorney    
Chris D. Linebaugh , Legislative Attorney    
IF11207
  
Data Protection and Privacy Law: An Introduction  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF11207  · VERSION 3 · UPDATED   
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.