Page 1 of 33 
  
         
Information Security Policy  University Policy No: IM7800  
Classification: Information Management  
Approving Authority: Board of Governors  
Effective Date: September  2021 
Supersedes:  July 2018  
Last Editorial Change:  December 2023  
Mandated Review:   September 202 8 
 
Associated Procedures: 
Procedures for Responding to an Information Security Incident  
Procedures for Addressing Security Vulnerabilities of Electronic University Information and 
Information Systems  
University Information Security Classification Procedures  
Procedures for Responding to the Loss or Theft of a Computing or Storage Device  
Payment Card Acceptance Procedures  
Procedures for the Secure Adoption and Operation of Cloud Services  
Security Threat and Risk Assessment Procedures  
 
 
Preamble  
1.00 Information is vital to the University of Victoria (UVic)  and is used in every aspect of the 
university ’s business. W ithout  timely access to  accurate  information, the university 
would be unable to fulfil its responsibilities to internal and external stakeholders. 
Increasingly, the university  is reliant on electronic information and the  controls over 
information systems and devices.  
2.00 With increasing reliance on electronic information  and information systems  comes a 
corresponding requirement  for the security of that information. The university  must be 
able to rely on the three key aspects of information security:  
(a) confidentiality (sensitive information can be accessed only by those authorized to do so) ; 
(b) integrity (information is accurate and up -to-date, and has not been deliberately 
or inadvertently modified from a previously approved version); and  
(c) availability (information can be accessed when needed and in a timely manner).  
 
3.00 The amount and type of risk that the university is ordinarily prepared to take in order to meet its objectives  is described in t he university’s Risk Appetite Statement(s)
. The 
university must manage information security according to Risk Appetite and applicable policy. Loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information can result in  
adverse consequences for the university .
 
  

Page 2 of 33 
  
Purpose  
4.00 This policy, along with associated procedures and standards referenced below, provides 
guidance on how members of the university community will  manage information security 
in accordance with other university policies, procedures , and standards  designed to 
protect and safeguard information against unauthorized use, disclosure, modification, 
damage,  or loss :  
1) In accordance with the value and sensitivity of the resource and asset to be 
protected.   
2) As required by the Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act  and 
other relevant legislation.  
3) At a level congruent with the university’s Risk Appetite.  
 Definitions  
5.00 For the purposes of policy IM7800, the following definitions apply:  
 
“administrative authority” means individuals with administrative responsibility for 
Units including but not limited to:  Vice-Presidents, Associate Vice -Presidents , Executive 
Directors, Deans, Chairs, Directors,  Chief Information Officer,  and other Unit heads .  
 
“information” means any electronic communication or electronic representation  (i.e. 
digitization) of knowledge such as facts, data, or opinions in any medium or form, 
including textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic, narrative, or audiovisual and includes 
Records . 
 “information security” means the protection of information and information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction to 
provide confidentiality, integrity, and availability  for the information they contain . 
 “information security standards” refer to the UVic Information Security Standards 
published and maintained by University Systems that appl y to all UVic information 
systems ; they are designed to protect  the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of 
university information.  
 “information system”  means the technologies, assets,  infrastructure, equipment, and 
facilities owned by, explicitly controlled by, in the custody of the university , or 
contractually provided by a third -party that access, store, or transmit information  (e.g. 
cloud services providers) . 
 
“information system owner” is the  Administrative Authority responsible  for the 
overall procurement, development, integration, modification, operation, maintenance, 
and retirement of an information system.  
 “institutional information system”  means  an information system that is provided by 
University Systems for use by the university community  including, but not limited to, 
systems that provide infrastructure services, such as the campus network and internet connectivity, systems that manage campus reporting, student information, learning 
management, human resource information, financial information, and systems that 
Page 3 of 33 
 contain primary records of information such as identity and access management 
systems.  
 
“provider”  means technical staff,  work units or external service providers /vendors  who 
design, manage, and operate information systems  (e.g. project managers, system 
designers,  software developers,  business analysts,  systems analysts, application 
administrator s, cloud tenant administrators, cloud service providers, network 
administrators, or system administrators).    
 
“risk o wner ” means the Vice -President identified to oversee the  management of a r isk.  
 
“security incident ” means a situation where security  is known or assumed to have  
been threatened, including but not limited to: loss of information  or records 
confidentiality, disruption of data or system integrity, or disruption or denial of 
availability.  
 
“unit”  means a group of users linked by a common interest or purpose, including but 
not limited to: faculties, departments, divisions, schools, offices, and centres.  
 “university c ommunity ” means :  
(a) credit and non -credit students, including distance students and continuing 
education students;  
(b) employees (faculty, librarians, and staff);  
(c) any person holding a university appointment whether or not that person is an  
employee;  
(d) post-doctoral fellows;  
(e) all persons who are employed under   contracts with university faculty members 
as the employer and who provide research or administrative services directly supporting faculty members’ research activities;  
(f) visiting researchers;  
(g) anyone contractually required to abide by university policies;  
(h) anyone volunteering with a university program or activity;  
(i) members of the Board of Governors and Senate;  
(j) separately incorporated org anizations operating on campus ; and  
(k) anyone who ordinarily resides in campus because of their relationship with the 
university . 
 
“user”  means  any member of the university community  that uses or accesses 
information systems  
 
Scope  
6.00 This policy applies to all users and units . It applies to all UVic information, information 
systems, activities, and all assets owned, leased, controlled, under the custody of UVic,  
or contractually provided by a third -party,  that are used by any user . 
7.00 This policy also applies to information sharing  arrangement s with external parties.  
External service providers  or parties  must be bound by the relevant information -handling 
Page 4 of 33 
 aspects of this  policy and associated procedures (e.g. Information Security 
Classification). 
 
Policy  
Statements of Intent  
8.00 Protecting the university’s electronic information, information systems and infrastructure 
is a responsibility shared by all members of the university community.  
 
9.00 Information and information systems will be adequately protected  throughout their 
lifecycles according to their Info rmation Security Classification  and level of acceptable 
risk. 
 
10.00  Risks for information systems will be minimized. Significant new risks or changes to risk 
in information systems must be accepted by an appropriate Risk Owner.  
 
11.00  To optimize system security, administrative efficacy, and best use of available university resources, it is expected that  units will preferentially use institutional information 
systems , where available .   
 
12.00  Where an Administrative Authority wishes to use or develop a non -institutional 
information system they must ensure it handles information in a manner that is compliant with all applicable legislation and policies, including IM7800 and GV0235, in 
consultati on with the Procedural Officer(s) for the applicable policies.  
 
13.00  Where an Administrative Authority wishes to use or develop a non -institutional 
information system that will interface or integrate with institutional information systems , 
permission must first be received from the Vice -President, Finance and Operations, in 
consultation with the Associate Vice -President & Chief Information Officer.  The Vice -
President, Finance & Operations will also consult with other executives where needed.  
 
14.00  Users  are expected to follow this information security policy , associated procedures  and 
standards .  
 
Roles and Responsibilities 
 
Users  
15.00  Users must:  
(a) use information and  information systems in a manner that protect s information 
in accordance with  UVic policy, and associated procedures , and relevant 
standards ; 
(b) agree to the policy on Acceptable Use of Electronic Information Resources 
(IM7200) to obtain credentials to access information systems and to continue to 
abide by this policy when accessing information systems ; 
(c) report security incidents  and violations of this policy  to the Information Security 
Office .  
 
Page 5 of 33 
 Providers  
16.00  Providers are responsible for developing and maintaining security controls for systems 
within their responsibilities in accordance to university policies, procedures and 
standards. Providers must:  
a) analyze threats, risks and adequacy of security controls in order to provide 
recommendations to Administrative Authorities;  
b) communicate changes in security risk to Administrative Authorities;  
c) at minimum follow the u niversity information security standards,  or exceed them  
consistent with the level of acceptable risk established by Administrative 
Authorities;  
d) implement and document user access and privileged account controls including 
authorizing, renewing, retiring, and revoking access  in a timely manner ; 
e) provide training and system documentation to users and appropriate University 
Systems personnel;  
f) establish and test contingency plan s, data back -ups, and recovery processes;  
g) report security incidents to  Administrative Authorit ies and the Information 
Security Office immediately upon discovery ; 
h) assist  in the investigation and resolution of security incident s in a timely manner , 
preserving evidence where required;  and 
i) provide  training  and information necessary to support this policy . 
 
Administrative Authorities  
17.00  Administrative Authorities are responsible for the security of  information and  information 
systems within their unit. In some cases, they may also be defined as the information 
systems owner . Administrative Authorities  must: 
(a) identify and communicate the purpose  and provider(s)  of the information 
systems within their responsibilities to University Systems ; 
(b) ensure that provider s develop and maintain security controls;  
(c) ensure that providers fulfill their responsibilities under this policy ; 
(d) ensure  that information  is protected according to its University Information 
Security Classification and i nformation security standards ; 
(e) ensure that security incidents are identified and resolved for the systems they 
manage;  
(f) manage  unit-specific information security risks in accordance with the university’s 
risk management policies ; and 
(g) work with University Systems and Risk Owners to communi cate and manage 
changes in risk.  
 
Associate Vice -President University Systems and Chief Information Officer  
18.00  The Associate Vice -President University Systems and Chief Information Officer  (AVP & 
CIO) oversees the security of information systems  for the university. The role of AVP & 
CIO will: 
 (a) coordinate  the implementation, administration, and support of this policy ; 
(b) provide policies, procedures and standards;  
(c) act as the Administrative Authority for institutional information systems ; 
Page 6 of 33 
 (d) provide  direction on compliance with the policy to  university leaders and  
Administrative Authorities;  
(e) manage cross-institutional  information security risks  in accordance with the 
university’s risk management policies; and 
(f) responsible for the investigation of security incidents and violations  of this policy , 
including providing guidance and direction to Administrative Authorities and 
Providers during security  incident s.  
 
Chief Information Security Officer and Information Security Office  
19.00  Under the direction of the CIO, the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) leads the 
Information Security Office to coordinate and manage the information security program 
for the university . The role of CISO will : 
(a) establish and maintain security objectives, strategies, and plans  for the 
information security program; 
(b) develop  information security policy , procedur es, standards and guidelines ; 
(c) create awareness about the university community’s  responsibilities within this 
policy; 
(d) monitor for, initiate, assess, and respond to information security threats , risks,  
and exposures;  
(e) support  Administrative A uthorities to establish acceptable levels of information 
security risk ; and 
(f) provide advice  and direction to Providers  in developing and maintaining security 
controls for information systems . 
 
General Counsel,  Chief Privacy Officer,  University Secretary, and University Archivist  
20.00  The General Counsel, Chief Privacy Officer  and the University Secretary , in conjunction 
with the University Archivist , will: 
(a) create awareness across the university community about members' 
responsibilities within this policy; and  
(b) establish processes for compliance with information s ecurity policy, procedures 
and university information security standards through the Records Management 
and Protection of Privacy policies and procedures.  
 
21.00  Vice-President Finance and Operations  
The Vice -President Finance and O perations is responsible to oversee and enforce this 
policy. This author ity is delegated from the Board of Governors.  
 
Board of Governors  
22.00  The Board is the authority and approval body for the university’s Information Security 
Policy . The Board also plays a role to ensur e that information security retains an 
appropriate focus within the organization . 
Compliance  
23.00  Non-compliance of this policy and its associated procedures will  be reported to the 
Information Security Office.  Users who have breached this policy , other university 
policies or laws may face repercussions, including loss of access to institutional  
Page 7 of 33 
 information systems, and discipline, in accordance with the relevant collective 
agreement and/or university policies and procedures . 
 
24.00  The university reserves the right to rescind access to institutional i nformation systems 
where necessary to protect the security of institutional  information systems or to avoid 
further breach of a university policy or law, on an interim basis without advance notice 
to the u ser. Users whose access has been rescinded will be informed at the earliest 
practical opportunity of the reasons for that action.     
 
25.00  Breaches by third parties , such as service providers and vendors,  may be considered 
cause for the termination of the contractual arrangement with the university.  
 
26.00  Where suspected violations of this policy involve personal information,  as defined in the 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act , the Chief Privacy Officer  will be 
informed and asked to review and recommend appropriate action.   
 
Review  
27.00  This policy, and any subsequent recommended changes to this policy, must be approved 
by the Board of Governors.  The Board (or a delegated authority) will review this policy 
for ongoing appropriateness.  
 
 
Authorities and Officers  
28.00  The authorities and officers for this policy are:  
i. Approving Authority: Board of Governors  
ii. Designated Executive Officer: Vice -President  Finance and Operations  
iii. Procedural Authorities : Refer to individual procedures  
iv. Procedural Officer s: Refer to individual procedures  
 
Relevant Legislation  
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act , RSBC 1996 c 165  
 
Related Policies and Documents  
• Acceptable Use of Electronic Information Resources Policy (IM7200)  
• Enterprise Risk Management Policy (GV0225)  
• Key and Access Card Control Policy (BP3125)  
• Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  
• Purchasing Policy (FM5105)  
• Records Management Policy (IM7700)  
• Directory of Records  
• Information Security Standards  
• Technical Approval Process   
 
  
Page 8 of 33 
  
 
Procedures for Responding to an Information Security Incident   
 
Procedural Authority: Vice-President, Finance and 
Operations                Effective Date:  September 2021  
Procedural Officers: Chief Information Officer, General 
Counsel, Chief Information Security Officer  Supersedes: December  2010 
Parent Policy:  Information Security Policy  (IM7800)  Last Editorial Change:   
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The purpose of this document is to set out response pro cedures to be followed when an 
information security incident occurs at the university.   
 
Definitions  
2.00 The definitions contained within the university’s Information Security and Protection of 
Privacy policies apply to these procedures.    
 Examples of security incidents include , but are not limited to : 
• Unauthorized use of your username and  password to access university information 
systems, e.g. impersonating you in emails to others, downloading student 
information from the student information system, changing student grades or marks 
in the learning management system. 
• Installation of unwanted or disruptive software on university computing devices, e.g. software that encrypts files and demands a ransom.  
• Defacement of a public university website , or unauthorized alteration of publicly 
posted information.  
• Disruption of access to university information systems, e.g. denial of service attack against a university online resource.  
 
Procedures  
3.00 There are several stages of activity when responding to an information security incident: 
identification and reporting, containment, eradication, recovery, follow- up, and 
correction. While the stages are listed sequentially, activities from various stages may 
overla p depending on the nature of the incident.  
 
4.00 It is essential to respond to information security incidents in a timely manner. This can make the difference between a major and minor incident and whether or not there is a data breach. Wherever possible, response personnel will be empowered to act quick ly to 
reduce the impact of information security incidents.  
 
5.00 Incidents may occur in any unit at the university. Regardless of where an incident occurs, the Information Security Office is responsible for coordinating the response and providers and administrative authorities are expected to follow the direction of the 
Information Security Office.   

Page 9 of 33 
  
5.01 External incident response vendors  may be engaged  by General Counsel as 
required; the Information Security Office will coordinate these resources as well . 
Identification and Reporting  
 
Report incident to Information Security Office 
(infosec@uvic.ca / 250 -472-HACK)
8 AM to 5 PM, M -F?Yes
Report incident to Campus Security 
(250 -721-7599)No
 
 
6.00 Any member of the university community, as well as external third parties, may report 
information security incidents.  
6.01 Information security incidents must be immediately reported to the university’s 
Information Security Office: 
a) Incidents reported to the Computer Help Desk or Desktop Support Services will be internally escalated to the Information Security Office.  
b) Report incidents  directly to the Information Security Office  via email to 
infosec@uvic.ca
 or voicemail to 250 -472-HACK (4225). 
c) Outside of 8 AM to 5 PM on weekdays  when the university is open, contact 
Campus Security via their 24- hour number: 250-721-7599. 
6.02 The Information Security Office may request additional information in order to effectively respond; this information must be provided as quickly as possible.  
 
7.00 The Information Security Office will conduct an initial assessment in order to determine the severity of the information security incident.  An incident’s severity will determine future actions surrounding the incident, including notification requirements or the 
necessity to assemble a response team  or activate the university’s Emergency 
Operations Centre  (EOC) .  
 
The incident’s severity will be determined based on factors such as the:  
(a) sensitivity and criticality of the information or information systems  involved;  
(b) operational  impact on the university or a u nit; 
(c) magnitude of the service disruption;  
(d) threat potential;  
Page 10 of 33 
 (e) expanse or scope of the i ncident;  
(f) impact to the u niversity’s reputation; or  
(g) other adverse impacts on the university, individuals,  or third -parties.    
 
The severity of an incident may not be initially apparent and so actions may change at 
any point during the response as new information is learned.  
 8.00 Where  and when  it appears to the Chief Information Security Officer that there has been 
a significant information security incident, the Chief Information Security Officer will inform the Associate Vice -President University Systems  & Chief Information Officer  and 
General Counsel .  
8.01 The Chief Information Officer will inform the requisite administrative authority (or 
designate) of the information security incident and may notify the Vice -President 
Finance and Operations as appropriate.  
8.02 Where the information security incident does or may involve the unauthorized 
disclosure of personal information, the Chief Information Security Officer will inform the Chief Privacy Officer.  
8.03 General Counsel will determine if external legal counsel /breach coach is required 
and provide direction regarding the creation and handling of legal advice related 
to the incident , including any reports created . 
8.04 General Counsel will facilitate  the use of external incident response vendors as 
required.  
9.00 The Chief Information Security Officer may, if warranted, assemble a response team that includes the following individuals (or their designates):  
(a) the Chief Information Security Officer  
(b) the Manager, Information Security Office;  
(c) the Associate Vice -President University Systems & Chief Information Officer; and  
(d) the administrative authority responsible for the information or information systems 
involved.  
 
Based on the nature of the incident,  regardless of severity,  the response team  may also 
include the following individuals (or their designates):  
(a) Chief Privacy Officer ; 
(b) Associate Vice -President Human Resources ; 
(c) General Coun sel; 
(d) Associate Vice -President Faculty Relations and Academic Administration ; 
(e) Executive Director , University Communications + Marketing;  
(f) Director, Campus Security ; 
(g) Manager, Emergency Planning;  
(h) Manager, Risk, Insurance & Continuity Planning ; 
(i) Manager, Computer Help Desk ; 
(j) other administrative authorities; and/or  
(k) other subject matter experts . 
Page 11 of 33 
  
The above individuals may be notified  of the incident  before their  active  participation is 
required  on the response team.   
10.00  For a major information security incident that  may potentially disrupt the university’s 
programs and activities, t he Associate Vice -President University Systems & Chief 
Information Officer and General Counsel  will consult t he Director, Campus Security 
regarding the activation of the EOC .   
11.00  For a major information security incident that  may necessitate insurance claims or 
reporting , the Chief Information  Security  Officer  will inform  the Manager, Risk, 
Insurance & Continuity Planning.  
Containment  
12.00  The Chief Information Security Officer (or designate), with the cooperation of the 
administrative authority and/or provider responsible for the information resource, will 
take steps to require that requisite unit(s) makes reasonable efforts to contain the incident by, for example:  
 
(a) stopping the unauthorized practice;  
(b) recovering the information or records that were improperly collected, used, 
disclosed , or disposed of;  
(c) shutting down affected systems;  
(d) revoking access; 
(e) changing computer access codes;  
(f) blocking network access; or  
(g) correcting weaknesses in physical security.  
 
13.00  Where a unit is not able to take the steps recommended, a request will be submitted to the Associate Vice -President University Systems & Chief Information Officer to approve 
further investigation and action . 
  
13.01  In instances where the Chief Information  Security  Officer (or designate) assesses 
that the incident is significant, and time is of the essence, the Chief Information Security Officer (or designate) may implement temporary security measures in 
order to mitigate any risks related to the incident until the incident has been 
addressed. In certain cases, such temporary security measures may be 
implemented prior to notifying the administrative au thority or provider in the 
affected u nit(s) in order to mitiga te risks associated with the incident. In cases 
where action will impair the ability of the u nit or person to fulfill their 
responsibilities, the approval of the Associate Vice -President & Chief Information 
Officer  will be required before taking this step.  
 
Eradication  
14.00  After an information security incident has been contained, the administrative authority or provider responsible for the information or information systems involved will take action to eliminate the problem or mitigate vulnerabilities that may allow a reocc urrence 
of the incident and provide timely and regular reporting of their actions to the Information Security Office.  
Page 12 of 33 
  
Recovery  
15.00  After an information security incident has been eradicated, the administrative authority 
or provider responsible for the information and information systems involved will attempt to fully -restore the information systems by, for example:  
(a) restoring information or information systems from backups;  
(b) validating that the information is complete and accurate or that an information 
system is operating correctly; or  
(c) performing additional monitoring.  
Follow- up and Correction  
16.00  Once action has been taken to mitigate the risks associated with the incident, upon the 
recommendation of the response team (where formed), the Chief Information Security 
Officer will determine whether further investigation of the incident is necessary. The 
response team will conduct any further investigation.  
17.00  Once all investigations are complete, the response team will provide a report of the incident to the appropriate administrative authorities which may include:  
(a) a summary of the incident;  
(b) corrective actions taken; 
(c) recommendations made for additional safeguards;  
(d) follow- up actions required; and  
(e) lessons learned.  
Related Policies and Documents  
• Information Security Policy (IM7800)
 and associate d procedures  
• Protection  of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  and associate d procedures  
• Records Management Policy (IM7700)  and associated procedures  
 
   
Page 13 of 33 
  
 
Procedures for Addressing Security Vulnerabilities of Electronic University 
Information and Information Systems  
 
Procedural Authority: Vice-President Finance and 
Operations                Effective Date:  September 2021  
Procedural Officer s: Chief Information Officer , General 
Counsel, Chief Information Security Officer  Supersedes: June 2017  
Parent Policy:  Information Security Policy (IM7800)  Last Editorial Change:   
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The purpose of these procedures is to help prevent secu rity incidents by setting out a 
process to identify and mitigate potential vulnerabilities that may threaten electronic 
university information or information s ystems’ security.  
 
Definitions  
2.00 The definitions contained within the university’s Information Security policy (IM7800) 
apply to these procedures.  
 
“vulnerability” means an identified security weakness in university information or  an 
information system that could lead to a security incident . 
 Procedures  
Prevention  
3.00 In accordance with the university’s Information Security Standards , providers are 
responsible for monitoring for vulnerabilities using  vendor notifications or industry 
publications and addressing them within the specified time frames in accordance with 
their identified criticality.  If patches are available, they must be applied within the 
specific time frame; if patches are not available, risk mitigation workarounds must be 
applied instead.  
 
3.01 University Systems or the Information Security Office  may also share 
vulnerability information and  directions regarding remediation and providers are  
expected to follow these directions.  
Vulnerability Identification and Reporting  
4.00 In accordance with the Information Security policy (IM7800), the university monitors its 
network and connected information systems for potential security exposures and takes 
pre-emptive action to prevent security incidents before such incidents occur. This 
includes conducting assessments of electronic information and information systems to 
identify potential vulnerabilities that may threaten such resources.  The monitoring or 
assessment may unintentionally reveal personal information.  
 

Page 14 of 33 
 4.01 Potential vulnerabilities may  be:  
(a) recognized by the Information Security Office as part of regular network and 
information system monitoring , assessment,  or maintenance;  
(b) communicated by a vendor or trusted third party ;  
(c) reported to the Information Security Office when a provider, ad ministrative 
authority (or designate), or other individual becomes aware of a vulnerability ; 
(d) reported as part of the Information Security Office’s Vulnerability Disclosure  
process .   
 
Preliminary Assessment  
5.00 Where the Information Security Office becomes aware of a vulnerability to information 
or in an information system, the Information Security Office will conduct an initial assessment to determine the potential impact of the vulnerability.  
 5.01 The potential impact of the vulnerability will be assessed based on factors 
including but not limited to the:  
 (a) sensitivity and criticality of the information or information systems involved;   
(b) likelihood of the vulnerability causing a security i ncident;  
(c) operational  impact to the university or a u nit; 
(d) operational impact on other information or information systems;  
(e) threat potential; and  
(f) other potential impacts on the university, individuals, or third parties.   
 
Notification and Implementation of Corrective Actions  
6.00 Where the Information Security Office reasonably believes that a vulnerability threatens 
university information or  an information system, the Information Security Office will 
create a report with recommendations detailing actions and timelines required for addressing the vulnerability and will provide the report to the Administrative Authority 
responsible for the Unit and/or P rovider of the  vulnerable  system(s)  and to the Chief 
Information Security Officer.  
 6.01 The Administrative Authority or Provider of the vulnerable system(s) is 
responsible for reporting its response to and implementation of the recommended actions (or reasonable alternate actions) to the Chief Information Security Officer and the Information Security Office.  
i. Failure to acknowledge receipt of the report and submit an acceptable response plan  may lead to escalation up to and including the Vice -
President responsible for the unit.  
 
6.02 In instances where the Chief Information Security Officer (or designate) assesses 
that the vulnerability is significant, and time is of the essence, the Chief 
Information Security Officer (or designate) may implement temporary security measures in order to  mitigate any risks related to the vulnerability until the 
vulnerability has been addressed. In certain cases, such temporary security measures may be implemented prior to notifying the Administrative A uthority or 
Provider of the vulnerable system(s) in order to mitigate risks associated with the 
vulnerability. In cases where action will impair the ability of the unit or person to 
Page 15 of 33 
 fulfill their responsibilities, the approval of the Chief Information Officer will be 
required before taking this step.  
 
7.00 Where the Chief Information Security Officer (or designate) assesses that the vulnerability is significant and remediation actions taken by the Administrative A uthority 
or Provider are not commencing in a timely or appropriate manner, the Chief 
Information Security Officer (or designate) may take temporary security measures to mitigate any risks until the vulnerability has been addressed. Such measures may 
include but are not  limited to: temporarily shutting down affected systems, or blocking 
or revoking ac cess.  
 Follow- up and Correction  
8.00 Once action has been taken to mitigate the risks associated with the vulnerability, the Chief Information Security Officer (or designate) will determine whether further investigation or monitoring of the vulnerability is necessary, and will provide a repor t to 
the Administrative Authority and/or Provider of the vulnerable system (s). 
 
Related Policies and Documents  
• Information Security Policy (IM7800)
 and associated procedures  
• Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  and associated procedures  
• Records Management Policy (IM7700)  and associated procedures  
 
 
 
  
Page 16 of 33 
  
 
University Information Security Classification Procedures  
 
Procedural Authority:  Vice-President Finance and 
Operations  
Procedural Officers:  Chief Information Officer , 
Chief Privacy Officer, General Counsel, Chief 
Information Security Officer  Effective Date:  September 2021  
Supersedes: January 2015 
Last Editorial Change:  
Parent Policies: Information Security Policy (IM7800)  
     Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The purpose of these procedures is to set out the minimum standards necessary for 
classifyi ng various types of university i nformation resources so that reasonable security 
arrangements can be applied to such information.  
 
Definitions  
2.00 The definitions contained within the university’s Information Security (IM7800 ) and 
Protection of Privacy ( GV0235 ) policies apply to these procedures : 
 
Note: Refer to the Procedures for the Management of University Records and the 
Directory of Records for information on the functional classification of university records. 
Refer to the Procedures for the Access to and Correction of Personal Information for 
information regarding freedom of information access requests.  
 
 See section 8.00 for definitions of security classification levels . 
 
Procedures  
Assigning an Information Security Classification Level  
3.00 Information resources must be assigned a security classification by the Administrative 
Authority at the level appropriate for that resource, in accordance with the classification 
levels set out in section 8.00.  
 
3.01 The securi ty classification level of the information r esource establishes the extent 
and type of security arrangements that must be imple mented in order to protect 
the information r esource.  
 
3.02 Prior to assigning a security classification level, u nits must be aware of relevant 
legislative requirements and regulatory obligations, and relevant university policies, procedures , and standards. Units may also refer to industry standards 
and best practices for further direction where applicable  if they meet or exceed 
university standards . 
 

Page 17 of 33 
 4.00 Administrative authorities must classify and manage the  information resources for which 
they are responsible based on a reasonable understanding of the overall value of the 
information resource.  Where appropriate, administrative authorities should collaborate 
with providers and University Archives to classify  and manage the information resources 
for which they are responsible.  
 
5.00 Administrative authorities must require that users in their units manage information 
resources according to the assigned security classification.  
 6.00 Security classification levels are applied to broad information types or categories, rather 
than individual records . 
 
7.00 Where it is unclear which security classification level is most appropriate  or when dealing 
with large volumes of information , units should employ the highest appropriate 
classification level.  
 
7.01 Where an information system or r ecord contains information that is classified as 
public and information classified at a higher level, the combined information 
must be managed at the higher confidentiality level.    
 
7.02
 In deciding which security classification level is most appropriate, units will take 
into account the volume of information and should consider employing a higher 
classification level for large volumes of information.  An increase in risk due to 
volume may  necessitate using a higher security classification level.  
Page 18 of 33 
 Information Classification Levels  
8.00  University information resources are classified according to the classification levels in the following chart.  
 Highly Confidential  Confidential  Internal  Public  
Definition  Information resource is so sensitive 
or critical that it is entitled to 
extraordinary protections, as defined 
in section 9.00.  Information resource is considered to 
be highly sensitive business or 
personal information, or a critical 
system. It is intended for a very 
specific use and may not be 
disclosed except to those who have 
explicit authorization to review such 
information, even within a 
workgroup or unit.  Information that is intended for use 
within the university or within a 
specific workgroup, unit or group of 
individuals with a legitimate need -to-
know. Internal information is not approved for general circulation 
outside the workgroup or unit. Information that has been approved 
for distribution to the public by the information owner or administrative 
authority or through some other 
valid authority such as legislation or 
policy.  
 
Legal Requirement  Protection of information where it is 
required by law or regulation (e.g. 
FIPPA or PCI -DSS), or as determined 
by contractual obligation.  The university has a contractual or 
legal obligation to protect the information.  The university has a contractual 
obligation to protect the information. Information may be mandated by 
legislation (e.g. FIPPA) to be public information.  
Reputational Risk  Critical loss of trust/credibility. 
Significant media attention. Business unit will be subject to special training 
and processes.  Significant loss of trust/credibility. 
Guaranteed to generate media 
attention and increased scrutiny. Potential for lost trust/credibility, and 
financial liability for breach of contract. May generate some media 
attention and result in increased 
scrutiny.  No impact on reputation.  
Operational Risk  Risk will render the business unit 
unable to achieve its overall 
objectives or mandate.  Significant impact on business unit’s 
ability to achieve its objectives.  Moderately impacts business unit’s 
ability to achieve its objectives.  Little or no impact on the business 
unit’s ability to achieve its objectives.  
Financial Risk  Major revenue loss, or impact on 
business unit budget, including 
research funding, or fines.  Significant revenue loss, or impact 
on business unit budget, including 
research funding, or fines.  Moderate negative financial impact 
for the business unit.  Impact is within normal operating 
budget margin fluctuations.  
Disclosure Risk  Highly adverse negative impact on 
the university, individuals, or affiliates, including identity theft. Moderately adverse negative impact 
on the university, individuals, or affiliates, including identity theft. Possible adverse impact on the 
university, individuals, or affiliates.  Disclosure of public information 
requires no further authorization and may be freely disseminated without 
potential harm to the university or its 
affiliates.  
 
 
  
Page 19 of 33 
 8.01    Prohibited Information: In addition to the above classification levels, certain information may be deemed by 
industry regulations, legislation, or other mechanism to be p rohibited .  Such information may not be collected or 
stored by the university in any form.  
 
Security Arrangements for Classification  
9.00     After an information security classification has been applied, reasonable security arrangements are required that correspond 
to the assigned classification level. The following table sets out appropriate safeguards for each level of information.  
 
 Highly Confidential  Confidential  Internal  Public  
Access  • Access is limited to specific named 
individuals or positions.  
• Principles of least -privilege and need -to-
know must be applied 
• Access must be revoked immediately when 
users leave the university or the custodial 
unit. • Access is limited to individuals in a specific 
function, group, or role.  
• Principles of least -privilege and need -to-
know must be applied 
• Access must be revoked as soon as 
reasonably possible when users leave the 
university or the custodial unit.  • Access is limited to employees and 
other authorized users for business -related purposes.  
• Access must be revoked as soon 
as reasonably possible when users 
leave the university or the 
custodial unit.  • No access 
restrictions  
 
Transmission  • Encryption required for all networks (e.g. 
wireless, Internet, and internal networks).  
• Avoid emailing  if at all possible  use secure 
file sharing methods instead  (e.g. 
departmental shared drive, UVic SharePoint site, UVic Teams site); i f ema il is 
unavoidable , must use uvic.ca email system 
and put data inside password protected 
email attachments , share the password via 
a secure secondary channel (e.g. phone call). 
• Double envelope mailings for hardcopy 
records.  • Encryption  required  for public networks 
(e.g. wireless, Internet).  
• Encryption strongly recommended on trusted, internal networks.  
• If emailing, must use uvic.ca email system 
and put data inside password protected 
email attachments.  
• If emailing, must use uvic.ca email system 
and password protect attachments , share 
the password via a secure secondary channel (e.g. phone call).  
• Clearly marked “confidential” on sealed 
mailings.  • Encryption strongly recommended 
on public networks (e.g. wireless, Internet).  
• If emailing, must use uvic.ca email system.  
 • No special handling 
required.  
 
Storage  • Stored within a controlled -access system 
(e.g., password protected file or file system, 
locked file cabinet, alarmed area).  
Additional controls implemented as 
necessary to comply with relevant 
legislation or other requirements.  
• Encryption mandatory in all environments.  
• Implement “clean desk” policy.  • Stored within a controlled -access system 
(e.g., password protected file or file 
system, locked file cabinet, alarmed area).  
• Encryption mandatory on mobile devices 
and workstations, and strongly -
recommended in all environments.  
• Implement “clean desk” policy.  • Stored within a controlled -access 
system (e.g., password protected 
file or file system, locked file 
cabinet).  
• Encryption strongly recommended 
in all environments.  • Stored within a 
system that ensures only 
authorized 
personnel can alter 
the information.  
 
Destruction  • Shredded or securely erased in accordance 
with the university’s Guidelines for the Secure Destruction of Information  • Shredded or securely erased in accordance 
with the university’s Guidelines for the Secure Destruction of Information • Shredded or erased in accordance 
with the university’s Guidelines for the Secure Destruction of 
Information  • Recycle  
 
 
Page 20 of 33 
 Relevant Legislation  
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act , RSBC 1996 c 165  
 
Related Policies and Documents  
• Information Security Policy (IM7800)  and associated procedure s 
• Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  and associated procedures  
• Records Management Policy (IM7700)  and associated procedures  
• Acceptable Use of Electronic Information Resources (IM7200)  and associated procedures  
 
 
 
  
 
Page 21  
 Appendix A: Information Classification Requirements  
 
The following chart provides examples of the types of information and their required security 
classification.  
 
 Information  
Public  • Annual reports  
• Advertising and media releases  
• Product and service information  
• Employee directory listings  
• Academic calendar  
• Published research presentations or papers  
• Job postings  
• Training manuals  
• Open-session Board and Senate minutes  
• Name of degree, diploma , and certificate recipients  
• Campus maps  
 
Internal  • Budget information  
• Personal pager or cell phone numbers  
• Select unit procedures  
• Student number (V -number) 
• Student grades (including test scores, assignments, and class grades)  
• Employee V -number  
 
Confidential  Enroll ed and Prospective Student Data  
• Social Insurance Number  
• Driver’s Licence Number  
• Student financials (bank accounts, wire transfers, payment history, 
financial aid/grants) 
• Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints, and full face images  
• Personal vehicle information (serial numbers, licen ce plate number) 
• Access device numbers (ISO number, building access code, keys, etc.)  
• Reference letters  
• Information protected by non-disclosure agreements  
• Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or codes  
• Payment guarantor’s and beneficiary information  
• Student contact or class lists  
• Enrolment status of an individual  
• Biometric identifiers, including finger, face, and voice prints, and full face images  
 
Employee Information  
• Social In surance Number  
• Personnel files 
• Personal vehicle information (serial numbers, licen ce plate number) 
• Accounting information (tax records, employee payroll, staff loans, etc.)  
 
Page 22  
 • Access device numbers (ISO number, building access code, keys, etc.)  
• Biometric identifiers, including finger, face, and voice prints, and full face 
images  
• Information protected by non-disclosure agreements  
• Personal financial information, including non -UVic income level and 
sources  
• Insurance benefit, payment guarantor’s , and beneficiary information  
• Pension records  
• Employee demographic information  
• Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code  
• Home/p ersonal address, phone number, cell number, email address  
 
Donor/Alumni Information  
• Donor’ s name  
• Social Insurance Number  
• Personal financial information  
• Donor  profile (personal & family history)  
• Bank account numbers, amount donated  
• Telephone/ fax numbers, e mail address   
• Information protected by n on-disclosure agreements  
• Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code  
 
Research Information  
• Research information (Granting Agency Agreements, o ther IRB 
Governance)  
• Sensitive research data  
 
Business/Vendor Data  
• Contract information (between UVic and a third party)  
• Access device numbers (building access code, etc.)  
• Biometric identifiers  
• Certificate /licen ce numbers, device IDs and serial numbers, e mail, URLs, 
IP addresses  
 
Other Institutional Data  
• Confidential information in c ontracts  
• Physical plant detail  
• Critical infrastructure detail  
• User account passwords  
Highly -
Confidential  • Legal suits  
• Closed or in camera  Board of Governors  or Senate  documents  
• Academic concessions  
• Appeals  and grievances  
• Criminal records checks  
• Health, disability , or counselling information  
• Harassment and discrimination reports  
• Authentication credentials  
• Personally identifiable research information  
 
Page 23  
 Prohibited  Credit Card Data / Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS ) 
(when taken as part of a financial transaction)  
• Service code  
• ISO n umber  
• CVC2, CVV2, or CID value  
• PIN or PIN block  
• Contents of a credit card’s magnetic stripe  (specifically “Track 2” data)  
 
 
 
  
 
Page 24  
  
 
Procedures for Responding to the Loss or Theft of a Computing or Storage Device   
 
Procedural Authorities: Vice-President Finance and 
Operations; General Counsel  Effective Date:  September 2021  
Procedural Officer: Chief Information Officer; Chief 
Privacy Officer; Chief Information Security Officer  Supersedes: December 2010  
Parent Policies:  Information Security Policy (IM7800)  
     Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  
     Records Management  Policy ( IM7700 ) Last Editorial Change:   
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The purpose of this document is to set out response procedures in the event of the loss 
or theft of a university computing or storage device in order to protect the information contained on the device  or storage .  
 
Definitions  
2.00 The definitions contained within the university’s Protection of Privacy  (GV0235
) and 
Information Security (IM7800 ) policies apply to these procedures . 
 
“computing device”  means any device that provides computing or information storage 
and retrieval including but not limited to: computers, tablets , smart phones, and media 
including flash drives, compact disks (CD), digital video disks (DVD), and portable hard 
drives.  
 
Procedures  
User Responsibility  
3.00 Users of university computing d evices are expected to make reasonable security 
arrangements to protect such devices from loss or theft and to protect information 
stored on such devices.  
 
Identification and Reporting  
4.00 Loss or theft of a university computing d evice must be immediately reported to Ca mpus 
Security, University Systems, and to the unit’s administrative authority.  
 
4.01 When reporting the loss or theft, users are expected to inform Campus Security and University Systems whether the computing device :  
i. contains personal information, or information classified as Internal, 
Confidential, or Highly Confidential under the university’s Information Security Classification procedure; and  
ii. is encrypted according to the university’s Information Security Standards.   
 
5.00 Campus Security will conduct an initial assessment and create an incident report.   
 

 
Page 25  
 Determine whether the 
lost or stolen device 
contained personal 
information  Determine whether the 
lost or stolen device 
contained information 
classified as Internal , 
Confidential , or Highly 
Confidential  Notify Campus Security, 
providing information 
regarding what type of 
information the device 
contained and if it was 
encrypted
Notify University 
Systems, providing 
information regarding 
what type of information 
the device contained and 
if it was encrypted
Notify the Administrative 
Authority of the unit of 
the above actionsCampus security will 
create an Incident Report
University Systems will 
open a ticket and follow 
the Procedures for 
Responding to a Security 
IncidentUniversity Systems will 
notify the Chief Privacy 
Officer if required
 
6.00 Campus Security will inform the Information Security Office in a timely manner if the lost 
or stolen computing device contains:  
(a) personal information; or  
(b) Internal, Confidential, or Highly -Confidential  information (as defined in the University 
Information Security Classification procedures)  
so that the Information Security Office can quickly respond (as defined in the Procedures for Responding to an Information Security Incident).  
7.00 Where the Information Security Office confirms that the lost or stolen computing device 
contains personal information, the Information Security Office shall immediately contact 
the Chief Privacy Officer.  
 
Response  
8.00 In cases where personal information is contained on a lost or stolen computing device, 
the Chief Privacy Officer, where warranted, will follow the Procedures for Responding to 
a Privacy Incident or Privacy Breach.  
 
9.00 Where the information contained on the computing device is non -personal and Internal, 
Confidential, or Highly Confidential, the Information Security Office, where warranted, will follow the Procedures for Responding to an Information Security Incident.  
  
Related Policies and Documents  
• Information Security Policy (IM7800)  and associated procedures  
• Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  and associated procedures  
• Records Management Policy (IM7700)  and associated procedures  
 
  
  
 
Page 26  
  
 
Payment Card Acceptance Procedures  
 
Procedural Authority:  Vice-President Finance and 
Operations  Effective Date:  September 2021  
Procedural Officer:  Executive Director, Financial Services  
Parent Policy: Information Security Policy (IM7800)   Supersedes :  June 2012  
Last Editorial Change:  
        
 
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The acceptance of p ayment c ards provides a convenient way to process the sale of 
certain goods and services at the University of Victoria. Card acceptance also presents 
security and privacy risks that must be understood by all units accepting payment c ards.  
 
2.00 The Payment Card Industry (PCI) has established a rigorous set of security standards for 
the collection, storage , and transmission of cardholder data designed to provide for  the 
security of data by protecting the privacy of persona l information and safeguarding the 
cardholder’s bank accounts and assets. All university units must meet the requirements 
for security.  
 
2.01 Implementation of PCI security controls is also part of the university’s 
Information Security Standards . 
 
3.00 The purpose of this procedure is to establish responsibilities and expectations of university units who accept payment cards.  
 
Definitions  
4.00 For the purposes of these procedures, the following definitions apply.  
 
“cardholder” means an individual with a payment c ard. 
 
“merchant ” means  a unit that has applied for and been assigned an account(s) with 
the university’s payment processor for the processing of p ayment card transactions.   
 
“payment c ard” means a credit card, debit card , and other media that is presented by 
individuals for the purpose of making payments.  
 
“payment processor ” means  the third party service provider that Financial Services 
has engaged to process payment card transactions on behalf of university merchants.  
 
“PCI -DSS”  means Payment Card Industry -Data Security Standards, which  were created 
by major credit card companies to safeguard cardholder information. Visa, Mastercard, 
American Express, and other credit card associations mandate that merchants and 

 
Page 27  
 service providers meet certain minimum standards for security when they accept, 
process, transmit , and store cardholder data. Merchants are required to demonstrate 
compliance on a periodic basis.  
 
“unit” means academic or administrative areas at the university, including but not 
limited to: faculties, departments, divisions, offices, schools, centres , and other related 
agencies,  and the University Club of Victoria.  
 
Scope  
5.00 These procedures apply to all units which process university payment card transactions 
in any form and which may include:  
 
(a) websites (eCommerce);  
(b) PIN entry devices (PEDs);  
(c) departmental information systems; and  
(d) manual entry by staff from information provided by cardholders (fax, telephone, 
forms ). 
 
Procedures  
6.00 The processing of payment card transactions must be carried out using the university’s 
approved third party payment processor. Units may not enter into separate banking 
and/or payment processing arrangements without the approval of Financial Services.  
 
7.00 All applications for merchant accounts are to be submitted to Financial Services.  
 
8.00 Units looking to implement new systems or replace existing systems that will process 
payment cards or exchange information with systems that process payment cards must 
consult with Financial Services (Director, Treasury Services) and University Systems prior 
to proceeding to ensure  these systems comply with standards required by our payment 
card processing agreements.  
 
8.01 Systems that do not comply with required standards will not be permitted to 
process payment cards until they are brought into compliance and approved 
by Financial Services (Director, Treasury Services)  
 
9.00 Units that process payment card transactions must implement and maintain PCI- DSS 
compliant processes and procedures identified by Financial Services and University 
Systems, at the expense of the unit.  
 
10.00  Units must imple ment mechanisms, based on recommendations from University Systems 
and compliant with PCI requirements and security standards, to manage how c ardholder 
data is securely received, stored , and transmitted and protected from unauthorized 
access. Cardholder data must not be transmitted by email, voicemail, or end -user 
messaging technologies, as these methods are not secure. PIN entry devices (PEDs) 
must be stored in a secure location.  
 
 
Page 28  
 10.01  Online payment forms should include mechanisms to reduce the probability 
of supporting fraudulent activities such as unauthorized third parties testing 
the validity of stolen payment card information.  
 
11.00  Units are responsible for safeguarding the confidentiality of cardholder data and 
personal information relating to the sale or purchase of goods or services, and for ensuring compliance with information privacy legislation and the university 
Protection of 
Privacy Policy . 
 
12.00  Hardcopy and electronic information collected about cardholders must be maintained in 
a secure manner and access must be restricted to individuals who have a valid business need to know.  
 13.00  The collection of cardholder data should be kept to a minimum. Data such as the primary account number (PAN), card validation codes, and personal identification 
numbers (PIN) must never be stored.  
 
14.00  Information collected about cardholders, including payment information, must only be 
used for the purpose for which it was given.  
 
15.00  Units are responsible for retaining appropriate transaction records for audit purposes for a period of seven years.  For the retention rule for accounts receivable, see Directory of 
Records FM155 -20. 
 
16.00  Units with an active merchant account may be subject to periodic security audits 
(internal or external), at the expense of the department. Financial Services is responsible 
for engaging third party vendors to provide PCI -DSS compliance services.   
 
17.00  Units found to have inadequate security (non PCI -DSS compliant) may have their 
merchant account privileges suspended by the Vice -President Finance and Operations in 
accordance with the Procedures for Addressing Security Vulnerabilities of Electronic 
Univer sity Information and Information Systems.  
 
18.00  Units must fully comply with the terms of the merchant agreement between the university and its payment processor. Units may not process payment card transactions 
for another merchant, person, or entity. Any questions regarding the terms of the 
university merchant agreement should be directed to Financial Services.   
 19.00  Merchants are responsible for developing training materials and training their employees on an ongoing basis as per current PCI standard requirements.  
  Relevant Legislation  
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act , RSBC 1996 c 165  
Personal Information Protection Act , SBC 2003 c 63  
 
  
 
Page 29  
 Related Policies and Documents   
• Signing Authority Policy (FM5100)  
• Information Security Policy (IM7800)  
• Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  
• Federal Department of Finance – Code of Conduct for the Credit and Debit Card Industry in 
Canada  
• Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards  
• Global Payments Merchant Agreement   
 
  
 
Page 30  
  
 
Procedures for the Secure Adoption and Operation of Cloud Services  
 
Procedural Authority: Vice-President Finance  and 
Operations  
Procedural Officers: Chief Information Officer ; Chief 
Information Security Officer  
Parent Policy :  Information Security Policy (IM7800)  Effective Date: September 2021  
Supersedes:  New 
Last Editorial Change:  
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The purpose of this procedure is to describe the process that must be followed 
whenever a unit wishes to use a cloud service provider.  
 
2.00 When university information is provided to a third party, the university relies  on their 
attestations that they will handle university  data appropriately. This is to both minimize 
the risk of a security incident and to be able to assure the campus community that the 
transfer of information complies with the requirements of relevant legislation and 
university  policies. 
 
3.00 If a third party is unwilling to provide attestations to the university’s  satisfaction, the 
residual risks must be reviewed and approved by the appropriate vice -president.   
 
Definitions  
4.00 The definitions contained within the university’s Information Security (IM7800 ) policy 
apply to these procedures . 
 
Procedures  
User Responsibility  
5.00 The administrative authority of the unit that wishes to transfer custody of information to a cloud service provider is responsible for determining the information security 
classification of this information.  
5.01 Note that even information classified as “public”  must be protected to ensure 
it cannot be altered by unauthorized individuals.  
 
6.00 Administrative authorities must complete a Privacy Impact Assessment in consultation with the Chief Privacy Officer and a Security Risk and Threat Assessment in consultation 
with Systems before moving information to a cloud service provider.  
 
7.00 The administrative authority of the unit that wishes to transfer custody of information to a cloud service provider is responsible for ensuring that the contract with the cloud 
service provider contains the Cloud Security Schedule.  
 
7.01 If the cloud service provider requests revisions to the Cloud Security 
Schedule, the administrative authority must ensure that University Systems 

 
Page 31  
 reviews proposed changes or alternative contractual language to mitigate 
information security risks.  
 
7.02 If information security risks cannot be fully mitigated to University Systems’ 
satisfaction, the Chief Information Security Officer will draft a Risk Memo that 
will document residual risks and must be reviewed and approved by the appropriate vice -president be fore the contract can be signed.  
 
8.00 Cloud service implementations at UVic  must meet or exceed 
UVic information security 
standards for cloud security.  Ce rtifications of compliance with or assessments against a 
set of accepted cloud security standards (e.g. ISO 27017, ISO 27018, NIST 800- 53, CSA 
Cloud Control Matrix Level 2, FedRAMP Moderate, Government of Canada PBMM 
Security Control Profile) are prefer red. 
 
 
Related Policies and Documents  
• Purchasing Services Policy (FM5105)  
• Protection of Privacy Policy (GV0235)  
• Records Management Policy (IM7700) 
• Information Security Policy (IM7800) 
 
  
 
Page 32  
  
 
Security Threat and Risk Assessment Procedures  
 
Procedural Authority: Vice-President Finance   Effective Date: September 2021  
and Operations    Supersedes:  New 
Procedural Officers: Chief Information Officer ; 
Chief Information Security Officer    Last Editorial Change:  
 Parent Policy :  Information Security Policy (IM7800)
  
 
 
 
Purpose  
1.00 The purpose of this procedure is to describe the process that must be followed when 
implementing a new information system or making a substantial change, e.g. upgrade, to an existing information system that will :  
(a) handle information classified as confidential or highly confidential , or 
(b) interface or integrate with an institutional information system 
in order to assess and mitigate information security risks before the system is used to handle university information. New may mean new information system to the university, new use of an existing information system by a unit, or new use of an existing 
information system by new unit.  
 
Definitions  
The definitions contained within the university’s Information Security (IM7800
) policy 
apply to these procedures . 
 
“security threat and risk assessment”  (STRA) means the overall activity of 
identifying, assessing, and reporting security risks for an information system; they are a 
snapshot  in time and raise the system security risks in an organization to a level at 
which risk -based decisions can occur effectively; and they document risk ratings and 
planned treatments.  
 
Procedures  
2.00 A STRA can be requested at any time but  must be completed for new or significantly 
modified information systems during planning, development, and implementation.  
 
3.00 A review and updated STRA must be conducted throughout the life of an existing information system for any significant or material change that would affect the security 
and must include any previously identified  risk.  
 
3.01 A STRA should be reviewed and updated prior to contract renewal of an existing 
system.  
 
4.00 A review schedule must be maintained to ensure that STRAs are periodically conducted throughout the life of an information system.  

 
Page 33  
  
5.00 A simple or a comprehensive STRA may be used depending on the appropriateness 
commensurate to the information system being accessed with the goal of achieving reasonable security.  
 
6.00 Administrative Authorities and Providers are responsible for ensuring STRAs are conducted for information systems under their custody or control  and updated as 
required per 4.00 . The Information Security Office can guide or, when requested  and 
subject to resource availability, conduct the STRA
 and make recommendations .  
 
The Province of British Columbia has a Security and Risk Assessment process  
that can be a good guide for great public sector entities to model around .  
 
7.00 To determine the reasonableness of an information system’s security, each risk must 
consider the likelihood which a threat may leverage a weakness, the potential impact, 
and acknowledge what this could mean to the university (scope of impact).  
 
8.00 For each risk identified, a planned treatment or acceptance must be documented. Risk treatment or acceptance will be conducted as appropriate in accordance with this policy 
and other university policies (e.g. Enterprise Risk Management Policy  GV022 5
).