Page 1 de 26 
  
  
INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Public Version  

 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 2 de 26 
 
Table of Contents  
1 Version Control  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............................  3 
2 Purpose  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  4 
3 Scope  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
4 Information Statement ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  5 
4.1. Organizational Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  5 
4.2. Functional Responsibilities  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  6 
4.3. Segregation of Duties  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  8 
4.4. Risk Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  8 
4.5. Vendor Risk Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ .........  9 
4.6. Asset Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...................  9 
4.7. Acceptable Use of Information Technology  ................................ ................................ ............  11 
4.8. Account Management and Access Control  ................................ ................................ .............  13 
4.9. Physical and Environmental Security  ................................ ................................ ......................  15 
4.10.  Personnel Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  15 
4.11.  Information Classification  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 16 
4.12.  Systems Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  19 
4.13.  Operations Security  ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  21 
4.14.  Encryption  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  23 
4.15.  Cyber Incident Management  ................................ ................................ ..............................  23 
4.16.  Vulnerability Management  ................................ ................................ ................................ . 24 
5 Compliance  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 25 
6 Annexes  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  25 
7 Reference  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 26 
 
  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 3 de 26 
 
1 Version Control  
 
 
 
 VERSI ON DATE  MADE BY  VERIFI ED BY  APPROVED BY  COMMENTS  
1.0 05/27 /202 2 Ing. Cleyderman 
Guerrero  Ing. Omar Arvelo   Map  CSF 
2.0 07/25/2022  Ing. Cleyderman 
Guerrero  Ing. Omar Arvelo   Map  CSF 
3.0 10/25/2022  Ing. Cleyderman 
Guerrero  Ing. Omar Arvelo   Map  CSF NIST  
4.0 01/18/2023  Bruno Oliveira 
(Protiviti Inc)  Ing. Omar Arvelo  Marcelo Del Vigna  
(Legal)  Map  CSF NIST  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 4 de 26 
 
 
2 Purpose  
This policy defines the mandatory minimum information security requirements for GlobeNet  as 
defined below in Section 3 Scope. GlobeNet  may , based on its individual business needs and specific legal 
and federal requirements, exceed the security requirements put forth in this document, but must, at a 
minimum, achieve the security levels require d by this policy.  
This policy acts as an umbrella document to all other security policies and associated standards.  This 
policy defines the responsibility to:  
• protect and maintain the confidentiality, integrity and availability of information and relate d 
infrastructure assets;  
• manage the risk of security exposure or compromise;  
• assure a secure and stable information technology (IT) environment;  
• identify and respond to events involving information asset misuse, loss , or unauthorized 
disclosure;  
• monitor systems for anomalies that might indicate compromise; and  
• promote and increase the awareness of information security.  
This policy benefits GlobeNet  by defining a framework that will assure appropriate measures are in 
place to protect the confident iality, integrity,  and availability of data; and assure staff and all other 
affiliates understand their role and responsibilities, have adequate knowledge of security policy, 
procedures and practices and know how to protect information . 
 
3 Scope  
This Policy  applies to all Globe Net’s computer systems and facilities, including those managed on 
Globe Net’s behalf  by third parties. This Policy applies to all employees, partners and third parties with 
access to Globe Net’s Technology Assets.  Technology Assets and t he information resident on them are the 
property of GlobeNet . 
Violations to this Policy may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of 
employment. In addition, when circumstances warrant, breaches of security and failure to comply  with 
this Policy will be referred to external law enforcement when appropriate. Users who discover a violation 
of this Policy must promptly notify their manager, Human Resources or the Help Desk. Business partners 
and managed service providers should repo rt any violation of this Policy to their designated point of 
contact.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 5 de 26 
 
Furthermore, t his Policy addresses the roles, responsibilities, security best practices, enforcement,  and 
acceptable and unacceptable use of Technology Assets, which include but are not  limited to:  
 
• Bluetooth  
• Cameras  
• Data  
• Email  
• External drives  
• Freeware/Shareware  
• Internet  
• Internet storage  
• Network  
• Message boards and blogs  
• Passwords  • Password cracking software  
• Personal Information  
• Phones  
• Physical security  
• Printers  
• Remote access  
• Scanners  
• Social Networks  
• USB drives  
• Wireless devices .
 
4 Information Statement  
4.1. Organizational Security  
Information security requires both an information risk management function a nd an information 
technology security function.  Depending on GlobeNet 's structure, such functions may be performed 
separately by different individuals , groups , or performed jointly by the same individual or group .  These 
functions must be performed by a high -level executive or a group that includes high level executives.  
1. GlobeNet  must designate an individual or group to be responsible for the risk management 
function assuring that:  
a. risk-related considerations for information assets and individual informat ion systems, 
including authorization decisions, are viewed as an enterprise with regard to the overall 
strategic goals and objectives of carrying out its core missions and business functions; and  
b. the management of information assets and information system -related security risks is 
consistent, reflects the risk tolerance, and is considered along with other types of risks, to 
ensure mission/business success.  
2. GlobeNet  must designate an individual or group to be responsible for the technical information 
security function.   For purposes of clarity and readability, this policy will refer to the individual, or 
group, designated as the Information Security Officer (ISO)/de signated security representative.  
This function will be responsible for evaluating and advising on information security risks.   
a. Information security risk decisions must be made through consultation with both function 
areas described in a. above.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 6 de 26 
 
b. Although  the technical information security function may be outsourced to third parties, 
GlobeNet  retains overall responsibility for the security of the information that it owns.  
4.2. Functional Responsibilitie s 
1. IT Team  is responsible for:  
a. supporting security by providing clear direction and consideration of security controls in the 
data processing infrastructure and computing network(s) which support the information 
owners;  
b. providing resources needed to maintain a level of information security control consistent with 
this policy;  
c. identifying and implementing all processes, policies and controls relative to security 
requirements defined by the business and this policy;  
d. implementing the proper controls for information owned based on the classification 
designations;  
e. providing training to appropriate technical staff on secure operations (e.g., secure coding, 
secure configuration);  
f. fostering the participation of information security and technical staff in protecting information 
assets, and in identifying, selecting and  implementing appropriate and cost -effective security 
controls and procedures; and  
g. implementing business continuity and disaster recovery plans.  
2. The workforce  (including: Employees, Contractors, Consultants and Third -Party Vendors) is  
responsible for:  
a. keep ing up to date with this policy and related procedures and standards, understanding the 
baseline information security controls necessary to protect the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of information entrusted;  
b. protecting information and resources from unauthorized use or disclosure;  
c. protecting personal, private, sensitive information from unauthorized use or disclosure;  
d. abiding by Acceptable Use of Information Technology Resources Policy  
e. Referencing this policy and related procedures and standards, and reporting suspected 
information security events, incidents or weaknesses to your manager and ISO/designated  
information security representative.  
f. in the case of employees occupying  a strategic and/or executive position at GlobeNet : 
i. ensure compliance with this policy by their subordinates;  
ii. evaluating and accepting risk on behalf of GlobeNet ; 
iii. identifying information security responsibilities and goals and integrating them into 
relevant processes;  
iv. supporting the consistent implementation of in formation security policies and 
standards;  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 7 de 26 
 
v. supporting security through clear direction and demonstrated commitment of 
appropriate resources;  
vi. promoting awareness of information security best practices through the regular 
dissemination of materials provided by the ISO/designated information security 
representative;  
vii. implementing the process for determining information classification and 
categorization, based on industry recommended practices, organization directives, 
and legal and regulatory requirements, to d etermine the appropriate levels of 
protection for that information;  
viii. implementing the process for information asset identification, handling, use, 
transmission, and disposal based on information classification and categorization;  
ix. determining who will be ass igned and serve as information owners while maintaining 
ultimate responsibility for the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data;  
x. participating in the response to security incidents;  
xi. complying with notification requirements in the event of a breach of private 
information;  
xii. adhering to specific legal and regulatory requirements related to information security;  
xiii. communicating legal and regulatory requirements to the ISO/designated security 
representative; and  
xiv. communicating requirements of this p olicy and the associated standards, including the 
consequences of non -compliance, to the workforce and third parties, and addressing 
adherence in third party agreements . 
3. The Cybersecurity Team i s responsible for:  
a. providing in -house expertise as security consultants as  needed;  
b. developing the security program and strategy, including measures of effectiveness;  
c. establishing and maintaining enterprise information security policy and standards;  
d. assessing compliance with security policies and standards;  
e. advising on secure system engineering;  
f. providing incident response coordination and expertise;  
g. monitoring networks for anomalies;  
h. monitoring external sources for indications of data breaches, defacements, etc.  
i. maintaining ongoing contact with security gr oups/associations and relevant authorities;  
j. providing timely notification of current threats and vulnerabilities; and  
k. providing awareness materials and training resources.  
l. maintaining familiarity with business functions and requirements;  
m. maintaining an ad equate level of current knowledge and proficiency in information security 
through annual Continuing Professional Education (CPE) credits directly related to information 
security;  
n. assessing compliance with information security policies and legal and regulat ory information 
security requirements;  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 8 de 26 
 
o. evaluating and understanding information security risks and how to appropriately manage 
those risks;  
p. representing and assuring security architecture considerations are addressed;  
q. advising on security issues related t o procurement of products and services;  
r. escalating security concerns that are not being adequately addressed according to the 
applicable reporting and escalation procedures;  
s. disseminating threat information to appropriate parties;  
t. participating in the resp onse to potential security incidents;  
u. participating in the development of enterprise policies and standards  that considers  
GlobeNet ’s needs; and  
v. promoting information security awareness  
4.3. Segregation of Duties  
1. To reduce the risk of accidental or deliberate system misuse, separation of duties and areas of 
responsibility must be implemented where appropriate.   
2. Whenever separation of duties is not technically feasible, other compensatory controls must be 
implement ed, such as monitoring of activities, audit trails and management supervision.  
3. The audit and approval of security controls must always remain independent and segregated from 
the implementation of security controls.  
4.4. Risk Management  
GlobeNet  must ensure that risk management processes are managed and agreed with the 
Organization's strategy, observing regulatory, legal, environmental, technological, and operational 
requirements. For that it shall:  
1. Consider  vulnerabilities, threat sources, and s ecurity controls that are planned or in place  to proper 
Information security risk management . 
2. Develop, document, and maintain risk management processes and regularly review to ensure they 
remain effective and relevant and that all stakeholders  are aware of  their responsibilities and the 
steps to be taken to protect the organization's information and assets.  
3. The risk management process is iterative and should be followed throughout a system’s or 
process’s life cycle.  
4. Monitor the effectiveness of its risk res ponse measures, by verifying that the controls put in place 
are implemented correctly and operating as intended. This must occur annually, at a minimum.  
5. Manager appropriately  any system or process that supports business functions for information risk 
and u ndergo information risk assessments, at a minimum annually, as part of a system life cycle . 
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 9 de 26 
 
6. Require  Information security risk assessments for any new projects, implementations of new 
technologies, significant changes to the operating environment, or in res ponse to the discovery of 
a significant vulnerability.  
7. Select the risk assessment approach it will use based on its needs, applicable laws and regulations 
as well as applicable policies . 
8. Document all r isk assessment results, and the decisions made based on  these results  to support 
further reviews and other related actions.  
4.5. Vendor Risk Management  
In order to identify, assess and mitigate risks that may arise from the use of external third parties, such 
as suppliers, contractors and service providers, GlobeNet  must protect its assets, reputation and 
compliance posture, ensuring that third parties comply with the organization's policies and standards,  as 
well as relevant laws and regulations. To do so, it must:  
1. Identify third parties that pose a potenti al risk to the organization.  
2. Evaluate the risks associated with each third party, taking into account factors such as the 
sensitivity of the data processed, the nature of the services provided and the geographic location 
of the third party . 
3. Perform due di ligence on third parties and suppliers before entering into a relationship with them, 
in order to identify potential risks, including assessing information security maturity and allowing 
the organization to mitigate them.  
4. Specific provisions related to inf ormation security, privacy of personal data and other protection 
mechanisms must be included in contracts with third parties and suppliers, in order to manage the 
risks associated with the relationship with GlobeNet . Where applicable, service contracts sha ll 
require the third party or vendor to maintain insurance coverage.  
5. Monitor the performance of third parties to ensure they are in compliance with the organization's 
policies and standards and identify potential risks and allow GlobeNet  to take timely mea sures to 
mitigate them . 
6. Establish clear lines of communication and procedures to escalate issues to stakeholders to ensure 
risks are identified and addressed in a timely manner.  
7. Contract clauses must be included that allow GlobeNet  to immediately terminate the relationship 
with a third party or supplier in the event of a breach or other event related to information security.  
4.6. Asset Management   
GlobeNet  must ensure that Information Technology (IT) resources are inventoried and configured in 
compliance with this information  security policies  and other  standards and procedures.  In this case it shall : 
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 10 de 26 
 
1. Develop, document, and maintain under configuration cont rol, a current baseline configuration of 
information systems . 
2. Review and update the baseline configuration of the information system  when required  and as an 
integral part of information system component installations and upgrades . Periodic review  must 
occu r annually, at a minimum . 
3. Develop, document, and maintain  a configuration change control  process to determine the types 
of changes to the information system that are configuration -controlled . 
4. Develop, document, and maintain  a security impact analysis  process to analyze changes to the 
information system to determine potential security impacts prior to change implementation . 
5. Define, document, approve, and enforce physical and logical access restrictions associated with 
changes to the information system . 
6. Establish and document configuration settings for information technology products employed 
within the information system  that reflect the most restrictive mode consistent with operational 
requirements . 
7. Monitor and control changes to the configuration settings in accordance with policies and 
procedures . 
8. Configure the information system to provide only essential capabilities . 
9. Review the information system periodically to identify unnecessary and/or unsecure functions, 
ports, protocols and services . 
10. Revie w and update the list of unauthorized software programs annually . 
11. Develop and document an inventory of information system components that:  
a. Reflects the current information system accurately.  
b. Includes all components within the authorization boundary of the information system.  
c. Is at the level of granularity deemed necessary for tracking and reporting.  
d. Includes information deemed necessary to achieve effective information system 
component accountability.  
12. Review and update the information system component inven tory when necessary  and/or 
periodically. Periodic review must occur every 2 years , at a minimum . 
13. Update the inventory of information system components as an integral part of component 
installations, removals, and information system updates.  
14. Employ automated mechanisms , including regular scanning , to detect the presence of 
unauthorized hardware, software, and firmware components within the information system .  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 11 de 26 
 
15. Disposal of IT assets must be carried out properly when they are no longer needed or when they 
have reached the end of their useful life, in order not to discard information belonging to GlobeNet  
together with said assets.  
4.7. Acceptable Use of Information Tec hnology  
GlobeNet  advises that the appropriate organizational use of information and its information 
technology ("IT") resources and the effective security of these resources requires the participation and 
support of the organization's workforce ("users"). Improper use exposes the organization to potential 
risks, including virus attacks, compromised systems and network services, and legal issues.  
All uses of information and information technology resources must comply with GlobeNet ´s policies, 
standards, pro cedures, and guidelines, as well as any applicable license agreements and laws including 
Federal, State, local and intellectual property laws.  
Consistent with the foregoing, the acceptable use of information and IT resources encompasses the 
following duties:  
1. Understanding the baseline information security controls necessary to protect the confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability of informati on; 
2. Protecting organizational information and resources from unauthorized use or disclosure;  
3. Protecting personal, private, sensitive, or confidential information from unauthorized use or 
disclosure;  
4. Observing authorized levels of access and utilizing only approved IT technology devices or services; 
and  
5. Immediately reporting suspected information security incidents or weaknesses to the appropriate 
manager and the Information Security Officer (ISO)/designated security representative . 
Reinforcing the commitme nt to the proper use of GlobeNet 's information technology resources, the 
following is considered unacceptable use : 
6. Unauthorized use or disclosure of personal, private, sensitive, and/or confidential information;  
7. Unauthorized use or disclosure of GlobeNet ’s information and resources;  
8. Distributing, transmitting, posting, or storing any electronic communications, material or 
correspondence that is threatening, obscene, harassing, pornographic, offensive, defamatory, 
discriminatory, inflammatory, illegal, or in tentionally false or inaccurate;  
9. Attempting to represent the organization in matters unrelated to official authorized job duties or 
responsibilities;  
10. Connecting and us ing personal owned or unapproved devices to the organization’s network or any 
IT resour ce; 
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 12 de 26 
 
11. Connecting organizational IT resources to unauthorized networks;  
12. In case of  using remote ac cess:  
a. Connecting to any wireless network while physically connected to the organization’s 
wired network;  
b. Installing, downloading, or running software that has not been approved following 
appropriate security, legal, and/or IT review in accordance with organizational policies;  
13. Using an organization’s IT resources to circulate unauthorized solicitations or adv ertisements for 
non-organizational purposes including religious, political, or not -for-profit entities;  
14. Providing unauthorized third parties, including family and friends,  access to the organization’s IT 
information, resources or facilities;  
15. Using organiz ation  IT resources for commercial or personal purposes, linked with  "for-profit" 
activities or support ing alien  business activity (e.g., consulting for pay, business transactions);  
16. Propagating chain letters, fraudulent mass mailings, spam, or other types of undesirable and 
unwanted email content using organizational IT resources; and  
17. Tampering, disengaging, or otherwise circumventing an y GlobeNet  or third -party IT security 
controls.  
Other actions should be considered to ensure security and compliance rega rding the use of GlobeNet 's 
IT resources, such as : 
18. Individual accountability is required when accessing all IT resources and organization information.  
Everyone is responsible for protecting against unauthorized activities performed under their user 
ID.  T his includes locking your computer screen when you walk away from your system, and 
protecting your credentials (e.g., passwords, tokens or similar technology) from unauthorized 
disclosure.  Credentials must be treated as confidential information and  must not be disclosed or 
shared . 
19. Users must not transmit restricted organization, non -public, personal, private, sensitive, or 
confidential information to or from personal email accounts (e.g., Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo) or use a 
personal email account to con duct the organization’s business unless explicitly authorized. Users 
must only  store restricted organizational, non -public, personal, private, sensitive, or confidential 
information on a n organizational issued device, or with a third -party file storage ser vice that has 
been approved for such storage by the organization.   
20. Devices that contain organizational information must be always attended  or physically secured 
and must not be checked in transportation carrier luggage systems . 
21. Users are routinely assigne d or given access to IT equipment in connection with their official duties.  
This equipment belongs to the organization and must be immediately returned upon request or at 
the time an employee is separated from the organization.  Users may be financially r esponsible for 
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 13 de 26 
 
the value of equipment assigned to their care if it is not returned to the organization.  Should IT 
equipment be lost, stolen or destroyed, users are required to provide a written report of the 
circumstances surrounding the incident.  Users may be subject to disciplinary action which may 
include repayment of the replacement value of the equipment. The organization has the discretion 
to not issue or re -issue IT devices and equipment to users who repeatedly lose or damage IT 
equipment.  
22. In insta nces where users access social media sites on their own time utilizing personal resources, 
they must remain sensitive to expectations that they will conduct themselves in a responsible, 
professional, and secure manner regarding  references to GlobeNet  and s taff. 
23. Users should respect the privacy of the organization’s staff and not post any identifying 
information of any staff without permission (including, but not limited to, names, addresses, 
photos, videos, email addresses, and phone numbers). Users may be held liable for comments 
posted on social media sites . 
24. Users are strongly discouraged from using the same passwords in their personal use of social media 
sites as those used on GlobeNet  devices and IT resources, to prevent unauthorized access to 
resources if the password is compromised.  
25. For cases where there is use of social media within the scope of official duties, the accounts used 
to manage GlobeNet 's presence on social media are pri vileged accounts and must be treated as 
such. These accounts are for official use only and should not be used for personal use. Privileged 
account passwords must follow information security standards, be unique on each site, and must 
not be the same as pas swords used to access other IT resources.  
4.8. Account Management and Access Control  
1. All employee account creation requests are to be submitted via a Help Desk ticket. The request 
must contain the employee’s full name, company/division, department, job title, m anager, and 
any special authorizations, such as access to certain applications. If the request requires any 
application or special group access, the Help Desk will forward the ticket to the appropriate 
Business Administrator. The Business Administrator wil l approve the request.  
2. All vendor ’s account creation requests are to be submitted via a Help Desk ticket from the manager 
of the department that has the vendor relationship. This request must have (i) the request type , 
(ii) vendor’s name , (iii)  the reason for the requested access,  (iv) specific resources needed , and (v)  
contact information . [Internal and Confidential Information ] 
3. If the new account is related t o a new GlobeNet ’s employee, the IT department will designate a 
computer system that must fit the work -related processes.  
4. Any user changes and/or termination requests must  be submitted via a Help Desk ticket.  
5. A member of the Help Desk department will modify, remove or disable access as appropriate.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 14 de 26 
 
6. All accounts must have an individual employee or group assigned to be responsible for account 
management.  This may be a combination of the business unit and information technology (IT).  
7. Access to GlobeNet ´ systems and network resources must be done  through the use of individually 
assigned unique identifiers, known as user -IDs.  
8. An authentication token (e.g., password, key fob, biometric) is associated with each user ID, which 
must be used to authenticate the  identity of the person or system requesting access.  
9. Automated techniques and controls must be implemented to lock a session and require 
authentication or re -authentication after a period of inactivity for any system where 
authentication is required. Infor mation on the screen must be replaced with publicly viewable 
information (e.g., screen saver, blank screen, clock) during the session lock.  
10. Automated techniques and controls must be implemented to terminate a session after specific 
conditions are met.  
11. [Internal and Confident ial Information ] 
12. Passwords  used to authenticate a person or process must be treated as confidential and protected 
appropriately.  
13. Passwords  must not be stored on paper, or in an electronic file, hand -held device or browser, 
unless they can be stored securely and the method of storing (e.g., password vault) has been 
approved by the ISO/designated security representative.  
14. [Internal  and Confidential Information]  
15. Information owners are responsible for determining who should have access to protected 
resources within their jurisdiction, and what those access privileges should be (read, update, etc.).  
16. Access privileges will be granted in accordance with the user’ s job responsibilities and will be 
limited only to those necessary to accomplish assigned tasks in accordance with GlobeNet  missions 
and business functions (least privilege).  
17. Users of privileged accounts must use a separate, non -privileged account when per forming normal 
business transactions.  
18. Advance approval for any remote access connection must be granted  by  GlobeNet .  An assessment 
must be performed and documented to determine the scope and method of access, the technical 
and business risks involved and  the contractual, process and technical controls required for such 
connection to take place.  
19. All remote connections must be made through managed points -of-entry reviewed by the 
ISO/designated security representative . [Internal and Confidential  Information ]  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 15 de 26 
 
20. Working from a remote location must be authorized by  management and practices which assure 
the appropriate protection of  data in remote environments must be shared with the individual 
prior to the individual being granted remote access.  
4.9. Physical and Environmental Security  
1. Information processing and storage facilities must have a defined security perimeter and 
appropriate security barriers and access controls.  
2. All employees and consultants are required to present their identification badge when entering 
the Company’s buildings and offices. Once inside the building, their ID badge must be visibly worn.  
3. A periodic risk assessment must be performed for information processing and storage facilities to 
determine whether existing controls are operating correctly and if additional physical security 
measures are necessary.  These measures must be implemented to mitigate the risks.  
4. Information technology equipment must be physically protected from securit y threats and 
environmental hazards. Special controls may also be necessary to protect supporting 
infrastructure and facilities such as electrical supply and cabling infrastructure.   
5. All information technology equipment and information media must be secur ed to prevent 
compromise of confidentiality, integrity, or availability in accordance with the classification of 
information contained therein.  
6. Visitors to information processing and storage facilities, including maintenance personnel, must 
be escorted at all times.  
4.10. Personnel Security  
1. The workforce must receive general security awareness training, to include recognizing and 
reporting insider threats, within 30 days of hire.   
2. Additional training on specific security procedures, if required, must be complete d before access 
is provided to specific GlobeNet  sensitive information not covered in the general security training.   
3. All security training must be reinforced at least annually and must be tracked by GlobeNet . 
4. GlobeNet  must require its workforce to abide by the acceptable use of information technology 
resources  rules , described in this Policy, and establish an auditable process for tracking their  
acknowledge to  the requirements  herein .   
5. All job positions must be evaluated by Cybersecurity Team   to determine whether they require 
access to sensitive information and/or sensitive information technology assets.  
6. GlobeNet  must conduct workforce suitability evaluations prior hiring, following the Personnel 
Screening Policy  in place . The suitability dete rmination must provide reasonable grounds for the 
GlobeNet  to conclude that an individual will likely be able to perform the required duties and 
responsibilities of the subject position without undue risk to the GlobeNet . 
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 16 de 26 
 
7. GlobeNet  shall establish a  process  to review information access  upon change of job duties or 
position.  
8. Employees  are responsible for ensuring all issued property is returned prior to an employee’s 
separation and accounts are disabled and access is removed immediately upon separation.  
4.11. Infor mation Classif ication  
To ensure the proper  protection of GlobeNet 's Information, it is necessary that the information be 
immediately classified according to the importance  and potential impact it represents for the 
Organization's business.  The GlobeNet  uses the following categories : 
Public  - It will be considered as public information that defined by force of law, or duly authorized for 
external disclosure. In general, this is information available to the public or that is accessible through 
public cons ultation, such as press releases, disclosure of events and lectures, advertising materials, among 
others. The disclosure of this type of information does not cause harm to the Company, to the holders of 
personal data or to customers, suppliers or other thi rd parties involved with GlobeNet . Public information 
can only be changed by Collaborators when authorized by the Information Manager.  
Internal use  - Information for internal use are those that keep matters exclusively relevant to the 
internal sphere of GlobeNet , being exclusively used by internal Employees or duly authorized third parties 
and partners. The misuse of this information may cause damage or medium -level institutional impacts to 
GlobeNet , including documents produced in GlobeNet 's daily operatio ns, such as lists of suppliers, sales 
information, invoices, among others. Information for internal use may only be disclosed to third parties 
in strictly necessary and previously authorized situations, such as to comply with legal or contractual 
obligatio ns. 
Restricted  – Restricted information is information that, due to its nature, must be limited to specific 
and previously authorized Employees. Such information, if disclosed internally or externally, has the 
potential to cause serious harm to the holders  of personal data or to customers, suppliers or other third 
parties involved with GlobeNet . In general, this is information related to GlobeNet 's business secrets 
(including budget, new products, strategic projects, customer lists), sensitive personal data  of Employees, 
internal sanctions applied to Employees or judicial or administrative proceedings. Such information must 
be kept internally and disclosed to other Collaborators or third parties in strictly necessary situations and 
provided that these indivi duals are part of the previously authorized group of people.  
Highly confidential  – Use of highly confidential information is restricted to a certain number of 
previously authorized Employees and only to senior management positions at GlobeNet , such as 
President, Vice -Presidents, Directors,  and Managers, in order to carry out their activities related to the 
Company, including long -term business strategies, ongoing critical business negotiations, results of 
internal audits, among others. The dis closure of this type of information can cause the most serious 
damage and harm to the holders of personal data or to customers, suppliers or other third parties involved 
with GlobeNet , such as loss of competitive advantages, image depreciation, loss of bus iness and 
customers, sanctions administrative and judicial proceedings. Such information must be maintained 
internally and restricted only to authorized employees.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 17 de 26 
 
Based on three principles of security: 1) confidentiality, 2) integrity, and 3) availability  each principle, 
information can be classified as low, moderate, or high  impact . Impact levels are defined as limited, 
serious, and severe or catastrophic.  
Categories  Potential 
Impact  Definitions  
Public / 
Internal use  Low  The potential impact is low if—The loss of confidentiality, integrity, 
or availability could be expected to have a limited adverse effect on 
organizational operations, organizational assets, or individuals.  
A limited adverse effect means that, for example, the loss of 
confidentiality , integrity, or availability might: (i) cause a 
degradation in mission capability to an extent and duration that the 
organization is able to perform its primary functions, but the 
effectiveness of the functions is noticeably reduced; (ii) result in 
minor d amage to organizational assets; (iii) result in minor financial 
loss; or (iv) result in minor harm to individuals.  
Restricted  Moderate  The potential impact is moderate if —The loss of confidentiality, 
integrity, or availability could be expected to have a serious adverse 
effect on organizational operations, organizational assets, or 
individuals.   
A serious adverse effect means that, for e xample, the loss of 
confidentiality, integrity, or availability might: (i) cause a significant 
degradation in mission capability to an extent and duration that the 
organization is able to perform its primary functions, but the 
effectiveness of the function s is significantly reduced; (ii) result in 
significant damage to organizational assets; (iii) result in significant 
financial loss; or (iv) result in significant harm to individuals that does 
not involve loss of life or serious life threatening injuries.  
 
Highly 
confidential  High  The potential impact is high if —The loss of confidentiality, integrity, 
or availability could be expected to have a severe or catastrophic 
adverse effect on organizational operations, organizational assets, 
or individuals.   
A severe or catastrophic adverse effect means that, for example, the 
loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability might: (i) cause a 
severe degradation in or loss of mission capability to an extent and 
duration that the organization is not able to per form one or more of 
its primary functions; (ii) result in major damage to organizational 
assets; (iii) result in major financial loss; or (iv) result in severe or 
catastrophic harm to individuals involving loss of life or serious life 
threatening injuries.  
 
  
 
By u nifying three principles of security , categories and  potential impact s, we obtain  Information Asset 
Classification Matrix : 
 Public / Internal Use  Restrict  Highly confidential  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 18 de 26 
 
 
1. The information classification process must include the following:  
a. Identification of information assets;  
b. Classification of information assets; by categories and considering confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability (“CIA”); and  
c. Determining controls based up on the classification . 
2. All information assets must be identified  and, when possible, appropriately grouped  for a more 
efficient application of controls  of security.  
3. An information owner must be  determined  by a higher level of management . The information 
owner is responsible for determining the information’s classification, how and by whom the 
information will be used . LOW  MODERATE  HIGH  
CONFIDENTIALITY  
Consider impact of 
unauthorized disclosur e. The unauthorized 
disclosure of 
information could be  
expected to have 
limited or no  impact  on 
organizational 
operations, 
organizational assets, or 
individuals.  The unauthorized 
disclosure of 
information could be 
expected to have a 
serious impac t on 
organizational 
operations, 
organizational assets, 
or individuals.  The unauthorized 
disclosure of information 
could be expected to have a 
severe  or catastrophic 
impact on organizational  
operations, 
organizational  
assets, or individuals.  
INTEGRITY  
Consider impact of 
unauthorized modification 
or destruction  The unauthorized  
modification or 
destruction of 
information could be  
expected to have 
limited or no impact on 
organizational 
operations,  
organizational 
assets, or  
individuals.   The unauthorized  
modification or 
destruction  
of information 
could be expected to 
have a serious  
impact on 
organizational 
operations, 
organizational assets, 
or individuals.   The unauthorized 
modification  
or destruction of  
information could be  
expected to have a 
severe  or catastrophic 
impact on organizational  
operations, 
organizational  
assets, or individuals.   
AVAILABILITY  
Consider impact of 
untimely or unreliable 
access to information  
 The disruption of 
access to or use of 
information or an 
Information System 
could be expected to 
have limited  or no 
impact  on organizational 
operations, 
organizational assets, or 
individuals.   The disruption of 
access to or use of 
information or an 
Information System 
could be expected to 
have a serious impact 
on organizational 
operations,  
organizational assets, 
or individuals.   The disruption of access 
to or use of information or an 
Information System could be 
expected to have a severe or 
catastrophic impact on 
organizational operations, 
organizational assets, or 
individuals.   
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 19 de 26 
 
4. An information custodian  must be determined . Information custodians are people, units, or 
organizations responsible for implementing the authorized controls for information assets based 
on the information owner’s requirements and the classification level . 
4.12. Systems Security  
Systems include but are no t limited to servers, platforms, networks, communications, databases and 
software applications.  
1. An individual or group must be assigned responsibility for maintenance and administration of any 
system deployed on behalf of GlobeNet . A list of assigned indiv iduals or groups must be centrally 
maintained.  
2. Security must be considered at system inception and documented as part of the decision to create 
or modify a system.  
3. All systems must be developed, maintained and decommissioned in accordance with a secure 
system development lifecycle (SSDLC).  
4. Each system must have a set of controls commensurate with the classification of any data that is 
stored on or passes through the system.  
5. All system clocks must synchronize to a centralized reference time source set to UTC  (Coordinated 
Universal Time) which is itself synchronized to at least three synchronized time sources.  
6. Environments and test plans must be established to validate the system works as intended prior 
to deployment in production.  
7. Separation of environments ( e.g., development, test, quality assurance, production) is required, 
either logically or physically, including separate environmental identifications (e.g., desktop 
background, labels).  
8. Formal change control procedures for all systems must be developed, i mplemented and enforced. 
At a minimum, any change that may affect the production environment and/or production data 
must be included.  
a. Databases and Software (including in -house or third party developed and commercial off 
the shelf (COTS):  
i. All software written for or deployed on systems must incorporate secure coding 
practices, to avoid the occurrence of common coding vulnerabilities and to be 
resilient to high -risk threats, before being deployed in production.  
ii. Once test data is developed, it must be protected and controlled for the life of the 
testing in accordance with the classification of the data.  
iii. Production data may be used for testing only if a business case is documented and 
approved in writing by the information owner and the follo wing controls are 
applied:  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 20 de 26 
 
 All security measures, including but not limited to access controls, 
system configurations and logging requirements for the production data 
are applied to the test environment and the data is deleted as soon as 
the testing is com pleted; or  
 sensitive data is masked or overwritten with fictional information.  
iv. Where technically feasible, development software and tools must not be 
maintained on production systems.  
v. Where technically feasible, source code used to generate an application  or 
software must not be stored on the production system running that application or 
software.  
vi. Scripts must be removed from production systems, except those required for the 
operation and maintenance of the system.  
vii. Privileged access to production systems b y development staff must be restricted.   
viii. Migration processes must be documented and implemented to govern the 
transfer of software from the development environment up through the 
production environment.   
b. Network Systems:  
i. Connections between systems must be authorized by the executive management 
of GlobeNet  and protected by the implementation of appropriate controls.  
ii. All connections and their configurations must be documented and the 
documentation must be reviewed by the information owner and the 
ISO/desig nated security representative annually, at a minimum, to assure:  
 the business case for the connection is still valid and the connection is 
still required; and  
 the security controls in place (filters, rules, access control lists, etc.) are 
appropriate and f unctioning correctly.  
iii. A network architecture must be maintained that includes, at a minimum, tiered 
network segmentation between:  
 Internet accessible systems and internal systems;  
 systems with high security categorizations (e.g., mission critical, systems  
containing PII) and other systems; and  
 user and server segments.  
iv. Network management must be performed from a secure, dedicated network.  
v. Authentication is required for all users connecting to internal systems.  
vi. Network authentication is required for all dev ices connecting to internal networks.  
vii. Firewalls must be implemented to all network segment, especially on critical 
segments.  
viii. Only authorized individuals or business units may capture or monitor network 
traffic.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 21 de 26 
 
ix. A risk assessment must be performed in consultation with the ISO/designated 
security representative before the initiation of, or significant change to, any 
network technology or project, including but not limited to wireless technology.  
4.13. Operations Security  
1. All systems and the physical facilitie s in which they are stored must have documented operating 
instructions, management processes and formal incident management procedures related to 
information security matters which define roles and responsibilities of affected individuals who 
operate or us e them.  
2. System configurations must follow approved configuration standards.  
3. Advance planning and preparation must be performed to ensure the availability of adequate 
capacity and resources.  System capacity must be monitored on an ongoing basis.   
4. Where an Organization provides a server, application or network service to GlobeNet  (or vice -
versa) , operational and management responsibilities must be coordinated by all affected parties .  
5. Host based firewalls must be installed and enabled on all workstations t o protect from threats and 
to restrict access to only that which is needed . 
6. Controls must be implemented (e.g., anti -virus, software integrity checkers, web filtering) across 
systems where technically feasible to prevent and detect the introduction of mali cious code or 
other threats.  
7. Controls must be implemented to disable automatic execution of content from removable media.  
8. Controls must be implemented to limit storage of information to authorized locations.  
9. Controls must be in place to allow only approved  software to run on a system and prevent 
execution of all other software.  
10. All systems must be maintained at a vendor -supported level to ensure accuracy and integrity.   
11. All security patches must be reviewed, evaluated and appropriately applied in a timely  manner. 
This process must be automated, where technically possible.  
12. Systems which can no longer be supported or patched to current versions must be removed.  In 
the case of obsolete but essential systems, which cannot be removed or replaced, security 
compe nsating controls must be established.  
13. Systems and applications must be monitored and analyzed to detect deviation from the access  
control requirements outlined in this policy and the Security Logging Standard, and record events 
to provide evidence and to r econstruct lost or damaged data.  
14. Audit logs recording and other security -relevant events must be produced, protected and kept 
Because of the nature of the data contained in this security logs (e.g., passwords, e -mail content). 
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 22 de 26 
 
they can be considered personally identifying information (PII) and must be protected with the 
controls for a confidentiality and integrity of high.  
15. Within the consolidated log infrastructure, logs must be maintained and readily available (online) 
for a minimum of 90 days. Data stored and maintained through backups and/or other (cold) 
storage mechanisms must be maintained for a minimum of 1 year. Based on entity requirements, 
including auditing or legal needs, logs may need to be retained for a longer period of time.    
16. Log data must be securely disposed of (at both the system and the infrastructure level) in 
compliance with the Sanitization/Secure Disposal Standard.  
17. Systems that collect logs, whether local or consolidated, must maintain sufficient storage space to 
meet the minimu m requirements for both readily available and retained logs. Storage planning 
must account for log bursts or increases in storage requirements that could reasonably be 
expected to result from system issues, including security.  
18. A process must be put in plac e to provide for log preservation requests, such as a legal requirement 
to prevent the alteration and destruction of particular log records (e.g., how the impacted logs 
must be marked, stored, and protected).  
19. Log integrity for consolidated log infrastructu re needs to be preserved, such as storing logs on 
write -once media or generating message digests for each log file . 
20. Access to log management systems must be recorded and must be limited to individuals with a 
specific need for access to the records. Access to log data must be limited to the specific sets of 
data appropriate for the business need.  
21. Procedures must exist for managing unusual events. Response must be commensurate with 
system criticality, data sensitivity and regulatory requirements . 
22. Monitoring s ystems must be deployed (e.g., intrusion detection/prevention systems) at strategic 
locations to monitor inbound, outbound and internal network traffic.  
23. Monitoring systems must be configured to alert incident response personnel to indications of 
compromise  or potential compromise.  
24. Contingency plans (e.g., business continuity plans, disaster recovery plans, continuity of operations 
plans) must be established and tested regularly.  To know : 
a. An evaluation of the criticality of systems used in information proce ssing (including but 
not limited to software and operating systems, firewalls, switches, routers and other 
communication equipment).  
b. Recovery Time Objectives (RTO)/Recovery Point Objectives (RPO) for all critical systems.  
25. Backup copies of information, soft ware, and system images must be taken regularly in accordance 
with the GlobeNet ’s defined requirements.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 23 de 26 
 
26. Backups and restoration must be tested regularly.  Separation of duties must be applied to these 
functions.  
27. Procedures must be established to maintain information security during an adverse event.  For 
those controls that cannot be maintained, compensatory controls must be in place.  
4.14. Encryption  
1. The need for encryption of information is based on its classification, risk assessment results, and 
use case.  
2. [Internal and Confidential Information]  
3. Use of outdated, cryptographically broken, proprietary encryption algorithms/hashing functions is 
prohibited . 
4. Electronic information used to authenticate the identity of an individual or process (i.e., PIN, 
password, passphrase) must be encrypted when stored, transported or transmitted. This does not 
include the distribution of a one -time use PIN, password, passphrase, token code, etc., provided it 
is not distributed along with any other authentication information (e.g., user -ID). 
5. A system’s security plan must include documentation to show appropriate review of encryption 
methodologies and products.  This will demonstrate due diligence in choosing a method or product 
that has received substantial positive review by reputable third -party analysts.  
a. Encryption is required for data in the following situations : 
i. When electronic personally identify ing information (PII) is transmitted (including, 
but not limited to, e -mail, File Transfer Protocol (FTP), instant messaging, e -fax, 
Voice Over Internet Protocol (VoIP), etc.).  
ii. When encryption of data in transit is prescribed by law or regulation.  
iii. When co nnecting to the internal network(s) over a wireless network.  
iv. When remotely accessing a GlobeNet ’s internal network(s) or devices over a 
shared (e.g., Internet) or personal (e.g., Bluetooth, infrared) network. This does 
not apply to remote access over a GlobeNet ’s managed point to point dedicated 
connection . 
v. When data is being transmitted with a GlobeNet ´s public facing website and/or 
web services, they are required to utilize Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure 
(HTTPS) in lieu of Hypertext Transfer Protoc ol (HTTP) where technically feasible. 
Public facing websites must utilize HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS), 
automatically redirecting HTTP requests to HTTPS websites where technically 
feasible . 
vi. [Internal and Confidential Information ] 
4.15. Cyber Incident Management  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 24 de 26 
 
1. GlobeNet  must have an incident response plan, consistent standards, to effectively respond to 
security incidents.  
2. The incident response plan must be tested periodically to ensure its effectiveness when used. 
Those involved must be trained in the execution of the t est plan.  
3. All observed or suspected information security incidents or weaknesses are to be reported to 
appropriate management and the ISO/designated security representative as quickly as possible.  If 
a member of the workforce feels that cyber security con cerns are not being appropriately 
addressed, they may confidentially contact the Security Operations Center directly.  
4. The Security Operations Center must be notified of any cyber incident which may have a significant 
or severe impact on operations or secur ity, or which involves digital forensics, to follow proper 
incident response procedures and guarantee coordination and oversight.  
5. Regulatory and supervisory agencies (e .g., CMA) and other legal institutions, when applicable, 
must be notified observing lega l obligations such as those described in cybersecurity and data 
protection laws.  
4.16. Vulnerability Management  
1. All systems must be scanned for vulnerabilities before being installed in production and 
periodically thereafter.  
2. All systems are subject to periodic penetration testing.  
3. Penetration tests are required periodically for all critical environments/systems.  
4. Where the GlobeNet  has outsourced a system to another organization  or a third party, 
vulnerability scanning/penetration testing must be coordinated.   
5. Scanning/testing and mitigation must be included in third party agreements , where applicable .  
6. The output of the scans/penetration tests will be reviewed in a timely manner by the system 
owner.  Copies of the scan report/penetration test must be shared with  the ISO/designated 
security representative for evaluation of risk.  
7. Appropriate action, such as patching or updating the system, must be taken to address discovered 
vulnerabilities.  For any discovered vulnerability, a plan of action and milestones must be  created, 
and updated accordingly, to document the planned remedial actions to mitigate vulnerabilities.  
8. Any vulnerability scanning/penetration testing must be conducted by individuals who are 
authorized by the ISO/designated security representative.  The  CISO must be notified in advance 
of any such tests.  Any other attempts to perform such vulnerability scanning/penetration testing 
will be deemed an unauthorized access attempt.  
9. Anyone authorized to perform vulnerability scanning/penetration testing must have a formal 
process defined, tested and followed at all times to minimize the possibility of disruption.  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 25 de 26 
 
 
5 Compliance  
This policy shall take effect upon publication  and shall be reviewed annually . Compliance is expected 
with all enterprise policies and standards. Policies and standards may be amended at any time; 
compliance with amended policies and standards is expected.  
If compliance with this standard is not feasible or technically possible, or if deviation from this policy 
is necessary to support a b usiness function, stakeholders should request an exception through the Chief 
Information Security Officer's exception process.  
 
 
 
 
6 Annexes  
 
1. Backup Policy Globenet  
2. Annex01_BP -02-001-BACKUP POLICY_backup -diagram .vsd. 
3. Annex01_BP -02-001-BACKUP POLICY_backup -diagram .vsdx . 
4. Annex02_BP_02 -001-BACKUP POLICY_Backup -jobs-scope .xlsx.  
5. Globenet Retention Policy  
6. GlobeNet Global Internal Data Policy  
7. Globenet Data Protection Officer Policy  
8. Authorized Use Policy  
9. Retention  Policy  
10. Information Security Incident Response Standard  
 INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY  
Page 26 de 26 
 
7 Reference  
 
– National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication 800 -53, Security and 
Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations . 
– Internal Revenue Service Publication 1075: Tax Information Security Guidelines for Federal, State 
and Local Agencies.