Security Classification: Public  
Canadian Institute 
for Health  Information  
Information Security Policy  
Introduction 
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) is committed to protecting the privacy 
of individuals and ensuring the security of their personal health information.  
CIHI is a secondary collector of personal health information. To receive this information, 
CIHI has entered into bilateral and data -sharing agreements with most provinces /territories  
and other  health care stakeholders across Canada. Pursuant to these agreements, CIHI has 
contractual obligations to  protect the security and the confidentiality of the information that it 
receives from its data providers. As well, CIHI is a prescribed entity under Section 45 of the 
Ontario Personal Health Information Protection Act (PHIPA). As a prescribed entity, CIHI is 
subject to independent oversight by the Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner of 
Ontario and must have its information practices reviewed and approved by the commissioner’s 
office every 3 years. This  review process provides our stakeholders with the assurance that 
CIHI’s information management practices comply with PHIPA and with privacy and security 
standards of practice expected from that office. As a result, CIHI adheres to this and any 
other  applicable privacy legislation.  
CIHI is committed to safeguarding its IT (information technology) ecosystem, to securing its data 
holdings and to protecting health information with administrative, physical and technical security 
safeguards appropriate to the sensitivity of the information. These safeguards protect CIHI’s data 
holdings against theft, loss, unauthorized use or disclosure, unauthorized copying, modification 
or disposal.  
Purpose  
The purpose of the Information Security Policy  is to 
• Provide CIHI Staff with direction and support for information security in accordance with business requirements and relevant laws and regulations;  and 
• Outline the responsibilities of CIHI Staff with respect to information  security.  
Information Security Policy  
 
Security Classification: Public  2 Scope  
This policy and all related standards, guidelines and procedures apply to all CIHI Staff, contractors, 
consultants, temporary workers and students.  
Policy  
CIHI management supports the development and maintenance of the Information Security Program in accordance with business, legal and privacy requirements. This program must address, at minimum, the following control objectives and practices:  
• A security governance framework;  
• Privacy and Security Risk Management;  
• Ongoing review of the security policies, procedures and practices  implemented;  
• An information security awareness and training program for all  employees;  
• Policies, standards, practices and/or procedures for ensuring the physical security of the premises, the security of information processing facilities and the protection of information 
throughout its life cycle (creation, acquisition, retention and storage, use, disclosure and  
disposition),  including policies and procedures related to mobile devices, remote access 
and security of data at rest;  
• An access management process for information and information processing facilities;  
• Secure systems acquisition, development and maintenance;  
• Technical vulnerability  management;  
• A cybersecurity program;  
• Security  audits;  
• Acceptable use of information technology;  
• Security in backup and recovery;  
• Business continuity and disaster recovery;   
• Information security incident  management;  
• Protection against malicious and mobile code;
 and 
• Continuous improvement of the Information Security Program.  
CIHI is committed to ensuring that reasonable steps are taken to ensure that personal health 
information is protected against loss or theft as well as unauthorized access, disclosure, 
copying, use, modification and disposal.  
Information Security Policy  
Security Classification: Public  3 Responsibilities  
The following CIHI individuals/groups have specific responsibilities for the Information 
Security  Program:  
• All CIHI Staff 
• Senior  Management  
• Vice President and Chief Information Officer  
• Chief Information Security  Officer  
• Chief Privacy Officer and General Counsel  
• Director, People and Workplace Operations  
• Senior Consultant, Cybersecurity  
• Manager, Information Security  
All CIHI Staff  
All information under the care and control of CIHI is a corporate asset and must be securely 
managed throughout its life cycle. The protection of CIHI’s information assets is a responsibility 
of all Staff, and Staff must understand and agree to their obligation to protect such assets throughout the information life cycle — creation, acquisition, retention and storage, use, 
disclosure and disposition. CIHI Staff shall create, acquire, retain, store, use, disclose, transfer or dispose of information only in accordance with CIHI’s policies, standards and guidelines.  
CIHI Staff must at all times engage in practices that are consistent with published information 
security policies, procedures, standards and guidelines. Additionally, CIHI Staff are obliged and 
expected to report all information security incidents and suspected information security incidents immediately upon learning of them. (For more information, refer to the 
Privacy and Security 
Incident Management Protocol .) 
Senior M anagement  
Senior Management shall provide the necessary guidance and support for the development and maintenance of the Information Security Program, in line with privacy and legal requirements and business strategy objectives.  
This support includes, but is not limited to, the following:  
• Integrating information security goals into relevant  processes;  
• Providing clear direction and visible management support for information security  initiatives;  
• Providing the resources required for information security;  and 
• Approving assignment of specific roles and responsibilities for information security across the organization.  
Information Security Policy  
 
Security Classification: Public  4 Vice President and Chief Information Officer (VP/CIO)  
The VP/CIO has overall responsibility for information security and represents CIHI’s Executive 
Committee. They shall ensure that information security goals are identified, meet organizational 
requirements and are addressed within the Information Security P rogram.  
Chief I nformation Security Officer (CISO)  
Reporting to the VP/CIO, the CISO is responsible and accountable for leading CIHI’s Information 
Security Program, which includes defining goals, objectives and metrics consistent with the 
corporate Strategic Plan and CIHI’s Privacy Program to ensure that the organization’s security 
principles, policies, procedures and practices support the protection of the organizati on’s 
information. The CISO shall manage and coordinate the design, implementation, operation 
and maintenance of CIHI’s Information Security Management System (ISMS).  
In addition, the CISO shall actively foster a culture of information security by leading and 
supporting activities both internally and externally to increase awareness of CIHI’s information 
security principles, policies and procedures.  
Chief Privacy Officer and General Counsel (CPO/GC)  
The CPO/GC is responsible for informing the CISO of relevant legislative, regulatory and 
contractual obligations. In addition, the CPO/GC shall collaborate with the CISO on key 
aspects  of the privacy and security program, including but not limited to  
• Privacy and security risk management;  
• Privacy and security incident management; and  
• Training and awareness.  
Director, People and Workplace Operations  
The Director, People and Workplace Operations , is responsible for the following in support 
of CIHI’s information security objectives:  
• The physical security of the premises;  
• Records and information management policies, procedures and practices;  and 
• Security in Human Resources  processes.  
Information Security Policy  
Security Classification: Public  5 Senior Consultant, Cybersecurity   
The Senior Consultant, Cybersecurity, is responsible for oversight of CIHI’s Information Security 
Program. Specifically, they shall create and maintain 
• A cybersecurity program aligned with CIHI’s information security objectives; and  
• A suite of information security policies, procedures, standards and guidelines to protect 
the confidentiality, integrity and availability of CIHI’s information assets.  
The Senior Consultant, Cybersecurity, is also responsible for the continued compliance and 
certification of CIHI’s information security practices, including the requirements pursuant to 
Ontario’s PHIPA.  
Manager, Information Security  
The Manager, Information Security, oversees the implementation and maintenance of CIHI’s 
security architecture in alignment with CIHI’s Information Security Program. 
Compliance, audit and enforcement  
CIHI’s Code of Business Conduct  describes the ethical and professional behaviour related to 
work relationships, information — including personal health information — and the workplace. 
The code requires all employees to comply with the code and all CIHI’s policies, procedures  
and practices . Instances of non -compliance with privacy and security policies are managed 
through CIHI’s Privacy and Security Incident Management Protocol , which requires Staff to 
immediately report incidents and breaches to incident@cihi.ca , including non- compliance with 
this policy . Policy owners are responsible for ensuring compliance with the policies, procedures 
and practices.  Violations of the code  — including violation of privacy and security policies , 
procedures and practices — are referred to People and Workplace Operations, as appropriate, 
and may result in disciplinary action up to and including dismissal, in accordance with the CIHI Employee Discipline Guidelines. Compliance is monitored through either CIHI’s Privacy Audit 
Policy  or  CIHI’s Information Security Audit Program, as applicable.  
Information Security Policy  
 
Security Classification: Public  6 Glossary  
Business record  
Business records comprise any information created, received or maintained as evidence and 
information by CIHI, in the transaction of business or in the pursuance of legal obligations.  
Business records may be in physical or electronic form and include, but are not limited to,  
• Information collected from data providers, clients and stakeholders;  
• Official organizational  records;  
• Transitory records;  and 
• Records in the public domain owned by  CIHI. 
CIHI Staff  
Any worker at CIHI, including all full -time or part -time employees, secondments, temporary 
workers, students and contract employees, including external consultants or other third -party 
service providers whose role includes responsibility for the secure storage of personal health information.  
Information asset 
For the purposes of this policy, information or information assets shall include the following:  
• All health information maintained by CIHI for the purposes of meeting our mandate;  and 
• All business records of the organization, regardless of the security  classification. 
Information may be in physical or electronic format.  
Information security  
The concepts, techniques, technical measures and administrative measures used to protect information assets from deliberate or inadvertent unauthorized acquisition, damage, disclosure, 
manipulation, modification or loss. 
For more information  
security@cihi.ca
 
How to cite this document:  
Canadian Institute for Health Information. Information Security Policy . Ottawa, ON: CIHI; 202 4.