Foreword to the Information Security Policy  
 
As a leading higher education institution committed to both high quality teaching and research, LSE 
has an ethical, legal and professional duty to ensure that the information it holds conforms to the 
principles of confidentiality, integrity and availabilit y. We must ensure that the information we are 
responsible for is safeguarded against inappropriate disclosure; is accurate, timely and attributable; 
and is available to those who should be able to access it.  
 
The Information Security Policy below provides  the framework by which we take account of these 
principles. It enable s the LSE community  to understand both their legal and ethical responsibilities 
concerning information, and empower them to collect, use, store and distribute it in appropriate 
ways.  
 
This policy is the cornerstone of LSE’s on -going commitment to enhance and clarify our information 
security procedures. It has my full support and I encourage all LSE staff and students to read it and 
abide by it in the course of their work.  
 
 
 
Professor Eric Neu mayer  
President and Vice Chancellor (Interim)  
  
Information Security Policy  
 Technical  
1. Introduction  
The confidentiality, integrity and availability of information are critical to the functioning and good 
governance of LSE. Failure to adequately secure information increases the risk of financial and 
reputational losses from which it may be difficult for LSE to recover.  
 
This information security policy outlines LSE’s approach to information security management. It 
provides the guiding principles and responsibilities  necessary to safeguard the security of the 
School’s information systems , and will be applied to all electronic information assets for which LSE 
is responsible .  
 
Supporting policies, codes of practice, procedures and guidelines provide further details , and can be 
found on LSE’s Policies and Procedures  page .  
 
LSE is specifically committed to preserving the confidentiality, integrity and availabil ity of 
documentation and data supplied by, generated by and held on behalf of third parties pursuant to 
the carrying out of work agreed by contract.  
1.1 Objectives  
The objectives of this policy are to:  
 
1. Provide a n information security  framework covering  all LSE information systems (including 
but not limited to all Cloud environments commissioned or run by LSE, onsite and offsite 
computers, storage, mobile devices, networking equipment, software and data) and to 
mitigate the risks associated with the theft, loss, misuse, damage or abuse of these 
systems. It requires that:  
a. The resources required to manage such systems will be made available , and  
b. Continuous improvement of LSE’s Cyber Security Strategy , systems and tools  will be 
undertaken  
2. Provide the principles by which a safe and secure information systems environment can be 
established for staff, students and any other authorised users.  
3. Make users aware of , and enable them to comply with , all current and relevant UK and ( where 
appropriate ) EU or other legislation.   
4. Ensure that all users understand their responsibilities for protecting the confidentiality and 
integrity of the data that they handle.  
5. Protect LSE from liability or damage thro ugh the misuse of its IT facilities.  
6. Maintain research data and other confidential information provided by suppliers at a level of 
security commensurate with its classification , including upholding legal and contractual 
requirements around information security.    
7. Respond to changes in the context of the organisation as appropriate, initiating a cycle of 
continuous improvement.  
1.2 Scope  
This policy is applicable to all staff, student s, other members of the School and third parties who 
interact with information held by LSE and the information systems used to store and process it.  
 
This includes, but is not limited to:  
• Cloud systems developed or commissioned by LSE,  
• systems or data a ttached to LSE networks,  
• systems managed by LSE,  
• mobile devices used to connect to LSE networks or hold LSE data,  
• data over which LSE holds the intellectual property rights,  
• data over which LSE is the data controller or data processor  (wherever held) .  
2. Policy  
2.1 Information security principles  
The following information security principles provide overarching governance for the security and 
management of information at LSE.  
  
1. Information should be classified according to an appropriate level of confidentiality, integrity 
and availability (see Section 2.3. Information Classification ) and in accordance with relevant 
legislative, regulatory and contractual requirements.  
2. Users  with responsibilities for information (see Section 3. Responsibilities ) must : 
a. handle that information in accordance with its classification level;  
b. abide by LSE policies, procedures, and any contractual requirements.  
3. Information should be both secure and ava ilable to those with a legitimate need for access 
in accordance with its classification level.  
a. Access to information will be on the basis of least privilege  and need to know . 
4. Information will be protected against unauthorized access and processing.  
5. Breac hes of this policy must be reported (see Section 2.7. Incident Handling ).  
6. Information security provision and the policies that guide it will be regularly reviewed, 
including through the use of annual external  audits and penetration testing.  
2.2 Legal & Regulatory Obligations  
1. The London School of Economics has a responsibility to ab ide by and adhere to all current UK 
and ( where appropriate ) EU legislation as well as regulatory and contractual requirements.   
2. A non -exhaustive summary of the legislation that contribute s to the form and content of this 
policy is provided in Appendix A .  
2.3 Information Classification  
1. The following table provides a summary of the information classification levels that have 
been adopted by LSE and which underpin LSE’s  6 principles of informati on security.  
2. These classification levels explicitly incorporate the UK General Data Protection Regulation’s 
definitions of Personal Data  and Special Categories of Personal Data , as laid out in LSE’s Data 
Protection Policy , and are designed to cover both primary and secondary research data.  
3. The Data Classification Standard  provides d etailed information on information classification 
levels and appropriate security contro ls.  
4. Information may change classification levels over its lifetime, or due to its volume – for 
instance:  
a. student grades  classed as Confidential prior to release become Public after release.  
b. NHS patient data aggregated to a higher level (so that, for instance, there is one 
observation for each GP Practice, or Hospital) is considered Confidential if any 
observations created using 5 or fewer patient -level observations are present,  
i. but is not considered confidential if any such observations are either not 
present, or are dropped from the dataset  
c. A dataset of names , addresses and telephone numbers that grows over 1000 records 
moves from Restricted to Confidential  
 
Security 
Level  Definition  Examples  FOIA2000 status  
1. 
Confidential  Normally 
accessible only to 
specified members 
of LSE staff. 
Should be held in 
an encrypted state 
outside LSE 
systems; may have 
encryption at rest 
requirements from 
providers.  1. GDPR -defined Special Categories of 
personal data  (racial/ethnic origin, 
political opinion, religious beliefs, 
trade union membership, 
physical/mental health condition, 
sexual life, criminal record) 
including as used as part of primary 
or secondary research;  
2. patient -level observations;  
3. aggregated patient  data containing 
observations created using 5 or 
fewer patient -level observations;  
4. passwords;   
5. large aggregates of personally 
identifying data (>1000 records) 
including elements such as name, 
address, telephone number.   Subject to significant 
scrutiny i n relation to 
appropriate 
exemptions/ public 
interest and legal 
considerations.  
2. Restricted  Normally 
accessible only to 
specified and / or 
relevant members 
of LSE staff or the 
student body  1. GDPR -defined Personal Data  
(information that identifies livin g 
individuals including home / work 
address, age, telephone number, 
schools attended, photographs);  
2. Name, email, work location, work 
telephone number ; 
3. reserved committee business;  
4. draft reports, papers and minutes;  
5. systems  
6. internal correspondence  
7. information held under licence  
8. company policy and procedures  (as 
appropriate to the subject matter)  
 Subject to significant 
scrutiny in relation to 
appropriate 
exemptions/ public 
interest and legal 
considerations.  
3. Public  Accessible to all 
members of the 
public  1. Annual accounts,  
2. minutes of statutory and other 
formal committees,  
3. pay scales etc.  
4. Experts’ Directory  
5. Course information  
6. Information available on the LSE 
website or through the LSE’s 
Publications Scheme.  
7. company policy and procedures  (as 
appropriate to the subject matter)  Freely available on 
the website or 
through the LSE’s 
Publication Scheme.  
 
2.4 Suppliers  
All LSE’s suppliers will abide by LSE’s Information Security Policy, or otherwise be able to 
demonstrate corporate security policies and / or appropriate information security certifications (e.g. 
ISO27001, Cyber Essentials Plus) providing equivalent assura nce. This includes:  
• when accessing or processing LSE assets, whether on site or remotely  
• when subcontracting to other suppliers.  
2.5 Cloud Providers  
Under the UK GDPR, a breach of personal data can lead to a fine of up to 4% of global turnover. 
Where LSE uses Cloud services, it retains responsibility as the data controller for any data it puts 
into the service, and can  be fined for a data breach, even if this is the fault of the Cloud service 
provider.  
 
LSE also bear s responsibility for contacting the Information Commissioner’s Office concerning any 
breach  of its data , as well as any affected individual. LSE must therefore be  able to judge the 
appropriateness of a Cloud service provider’s information security provision. This leads to the 
following stipulat ions:  
1. All providers of Cloud services to LSE must respond to LSE’s Cloud Assurance Questionnaire 
prior to a service being commissioned, in order for LSE to understand the provider’s 
information security provision.  
a. No cloud services contract will be approv ed by the Procurement team without either :  
i. A completed Cloud Assurance Questionnaire , with approval given for use of the 
service by the Information Security Team ; or 
ii. Written approval from  the Information Security Team that the contract can be 
commissioned.  
2. Cloud services used to process personal data will be expected to have ISO27001 certification  
or equivalent controls , with adherence to the standard considered the best way of a supplier 
proving that it has met the UK GDPR principle of privacy by design, and that it has considered 
information security throughout its service model.  
3. Any request for exceptions , where the standards of security cannot be demonstrated to meet 
ISO27001  will be c onsidered by LSE’s  Risk Manager and the Chief Operating Officer.  
 
2.6 Compliance, Policy Awareness and Disciplinary Procedures  
1. Compliance with this policy is mandatory . 
2. Mandatory user awareness training will accompany this policy .  
3. All current staff, students and other authorised users will be informed of the existence of this 
policy and the availability of supporting policies, codes of practice and guidelines.  
4. Any security breach will be handled in accordance with all relevant School policies, including 
the Conditions of Use of IT Facilities at t he LSE  and the appropriate disciplinary policies.  
2.7 Incident Handling  
1. If a member of the School is aware of an information security incident then they must report 
it to the DTS Service Desk at tech.support @lse.ac.uk  or telephone 020 7107 5000.  
2. Breaches of personal data will be reported to the Information Commissioner’s Office by 
LSE’s Data Protection Officer  (DPO) . The DPO can be contacted at 
glpd.info.rights@lse.ac.uk .  
3. All members of the School Community must report instances of actual or suspected phishing to 
phishing@lse.ac.uk  
2.8 Supporting Policies, Codes of Practice, Procedures and Guidelines  
1. Supporting policies have been developed to strengthen and reinforce this policy statement. 
These, along with associated codes of practice, procedures and guidelines are published 
together and are available on LSE’s  Policies and Procedures  website .  
2. All staff, students and any third parties authorised to access LSE’s network or computing 
facilities are required to familiarise themselves with these  supporting documents and to 
adhere to them in the working environment.  
2.9 Review and Development  
1. This policy  will be reviewed annually by the appr opriate LSE  Management  Board and 
updated regularly to ensure it remain s appropriate in the light of any relevant changes to the 
law, organisational policies or contractual obligations.  
2. Additional policy  may be created to cover specific areas.  
3. Responsibilities  
 
Members of LSE:  
All members of LSE, LSE associates, agency staff  working for LSE, third parties and collaborators 
on LSE projects will be users of LSE information. This carries with it the responsibility to abide by 
this policy , supporting policies  and relevant legislation . No individual should be able to access 
information to which they do not have a legitimate access right. Notwithstanding systems in place 
to prevent this, no individual should knowingly contravene this policy, nor allow others to do so. To 
report data breac hes, please see Section 2.5: Incident Handling  
 
Business Led Technology Teams :  
Responsible for the information systems (e.g. HR/ Registry/ Finance) both manual and electronic 
that support LSE’s work. This includes ensuring that data is appropriately store d, that the risks to 
data are appropriately understood and either mitigated or explicitly accepted, that the correct 
access rights have been put in place, with data only accessible to the right people, and ensuring 
there are appropriate backup, retention, disaster recovery and disposal mechanisms in place.   
 
Principal Investigators / Project administrators :  
Responsible for the security of information produced, provided or held in the course of carrying out 
research, consultancy or knowledge transfer activities. This includes ensuring that data is 
appropriately stored, that the risks to data are appropriately understood and mitigated, that the 
correct access rights have been put in place, with data only accessible to the right people, and 
ensu ring there are appropriate backup, retention, disaster recovery and disposal mechanisms.  
 
Professional service leads, Departmental managers / Line managers :  
Responsible for specific area of LSE work, including all the supporting information and 
documentation that may include working documents/ contracts/ staff or student information.  
 
Director  of Research and Innovation  
Signs off LSE research contracts and is  responsible for providing the assurance that any mandated 
security measures for research data are met.  
 
Procurement Team  
Ensuring any requests for purchase of IT service and cloud contracts have been authorised by the 
Information Security Team.  
 
School Secretary  
Responsible for LSE compliance with the UK General Data Protection Regulation  
 
Records Manager / Data Protection Officer  
Responsible for data protection and records retention issues. Breach reporting to ICO  
 
DTS :  
Responsible for ensuring that the provision of LSE’s IT infrastructure , cloud environments and 
applicati ons is consistent with the demands of this policy and current good practice.  
 
Estates  Security  Team : 
Responsible for physical aspects of security.  
 
Cyber  Security Team:  
Responsible for assurance activities, pen testing, information security policies and specialist 
information security advice . Incident response for cyber security issues.  User awareness.  
 
Information Governance Management Board  
Responsible for approving information security policies  
 
Data and Technology Management Board  
Responsible for approving technology policies.     
Document control  
Last review ed by DTMB: 16/05/2022  
Version History  
Date  Version  Comments  
12/10/16  
 
21/02/17  
 
22/05/17  
 
13/06/17  
 
23/11/17  
07/02/18  
11/01/19  
 
 
 
18/05/20  
01/06/20  
03/05/22  
 
 
13/06/23  
 
09/01/24  
 3.13  
 
3.14  
 
3.15  
 
3.16  
 
3.17  
3.18  
3.19 
 
 
 
3.20  
3.21  
3.22  
 
 
3.23  
 
3.25  Changed ‘Purpose’ to ‘Objectives’. Made more explicit the commitment to 
continual improvement, including via internal audits and pen testing.  Included 
explicit reference to NHS patient data in the data classification. Added in 
commitment to satisfy third party data providers’ commitments. Included 
references to the GDPR. Alterations as per recommendations of LSE ISO27001 
certification auditors.  
Updated Objectives to include ‘support for any ISMS, and commitment to 
continuous improvement of any ISMS. Also added in a clause about suppliers 
abiding by our informatio n security policy.  
Included a further objective (6) to keep research data and supplier data in a 
state commensurate with its classification.  
Inclusion of new foreword signed by Director Dame Minouche Shafik.   
Adjusted to more specifically address GDPR req uirements. New cloud supplier 
section incorporated. Submitted to ISAB for annual review.  
Updated to reflect new information classification standard  
 
 
Removal of ISAB (replaced by IGMB). Some tidy -up and correction of out of 
date references . Updating of URL s. 
Updated 1.1.1, 1.1.2, 2.2, 2.7. Added in COO as Caldicott G uardian.  
 
Updated references and links.  Modernised a number of sections  including 
responsibilities . Reduced the total number of words by removing superfluities 
and repetition. Removal of whistle blowing policy – not strictly a cyber security 
issue  
 
 
Mended broken links, updated job titles , reviewed content . New foreword from 
Eric Neumeyer.  
 
Standard rev iew (v 3.24 was experimental and not used).  Procurement Team’s 
role in checking contracts for compliance made explicit in ‘Responsibilities’ 
section. Data protection references changed to UK GDPR (to disambiguate 
from the EU’s GDPR as the two start to dive rge).  
Contacts  
Position  Name  Email  Notes  
Director of Cyber Security 
& Risk Management  Jethro Perkins  j.a.perkins@lse.ac.uk  
  
Communications and Training  
Will this document be publicised through Internal 
Communications?  Yes – on website.  
Will training needs arise from this policy  Yes 
The Cyber Security Awareness training must be completed by all staff.  
 
 
 
Appendix A: Summary of relevant legislation  
The Computer Misuse Act 1990  
Defines offences in relation to the misuse of computers as:  
1. Unauthorised access to computer material.  
2. Unauthorised access with intent to commit or facilitate commission of further offences.  
3. Unauthorised modification of computer material.  
The Freedom of Information Act 2000  
The Freedom of Information Act 2000 (FOIA2000) is a general right of public access to all types of 
recorded information held by p ublic authorities in order to promote a culture of openness and 
accountability.  
Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000  
The Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 regulates the powers of public bodies to carry out 
surveillance and investigation. It covers the interception and use of communications data and can 
be invoked in the cases of national security, and for the purposes of detecting crime, preventing 
disorder, public safety and protecting public health.   
Defamation Act 1996  
“Defamation is a false accusation of an offence or a malicious misrepresentation of someone's 
words or actions. The defamation laws exist to protect a person or an organisation's reputation 
from harm.1” 
Obscene Publications Act 1959 and 1964  
The law makes it an offence to publish, whether for gain or not, any content whose effect will tend 
to "deprave and corrupt" those likely to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it. 
This could include images of extreme sexual activity such as bestiality, necrophilia,  rape or torture.2 
Protection of Children Act 1978, Criminal Justice Act 1988, Criminal 
Justice and Immigration Act 2008  
The Protection  of Children Act 1978  prevents the exploitation of children by making indecent 
photographs of them and penalises the distribution and showing of such indecent photographs.  
Organisations must take appropriate steps to prevent such illegal activities by their workers using 
their digital systems and networks.  
The definition of ‘photographs’ include data stored  on a computer disc or by other electronic means 
which is capable of conversion into an image.  
It is an offence for a person to […] distribute or show such indecent photographs; or to possess 
such indecent photographs, with a view to their being distribute d or shown by himself or others.  
 
1 “Defamation”, Para digm , (2008) http://www.paradigm.ac.uk/workbook/legal -issues/defamation.html  [accessed 01/05/15]  
2 “Obscene Publications Act 1959 and 1964”, Internet Watch Foundation , https://www.iwf.org.uk/hotline/the -laws/criminally -obscene -adult -
content/obscene -publications -act-1959 -and-1964  [accessed 01/05/15]  
Section 160 of the  Criminal Justice Act 1988  made the simple possession of indecent photographs 
of children an offence. Making an indecent image of a child is a serious arrestable offence carrying 
a maximum sentence of 10 y ears imprisonment. Note: The term "make" includes downloading 
images from the Internet and storing or printing them out.3 
Terrorism Act 2006  
The Terrorism Act 2006 makes it an offence to write, publish or circulate any material that could be 
seen by any one or more of the persons to whom it has or may become available, as a direct or 
indirect encouragement or other inducement to the commission, preparation or instigation of acts 
of terrorism.  
It also prohibits the writing, publication or circulation o f information which is likely to be useful to 
any one or more persons in the commission or preparation of terrorist acts or is in a form or context 
in which it is likely to be understood by any one or more of those persons as being wholly or mainly 
for the  purpose of being so useful.  
In addition, it prohibits the glorification of the commission or preparation (whether in the past, in the 
future or generally) of terrorist acts or such offences; and the suggestion that what is being glorified 
is being glorifi ed as conduct that should be emulated in existing circumstances.  
Counter -Terrorism and Security Act 2015 – Statutory Guidance  
The statutory guidance accompanying the Counter -Terrorism and Security Act 2015 (Prevent duty 
guidance for higher education instit utions in England and Wales 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/445916/Prevent_
Duty_Guidance_For_Higher_Education__England__Wales_.pdf) requires LSE to have “due regard to 
the need to prevent people from being drawn in to terrorism.” The Act imposes certain duties under 
the Prevent  programme, which is  aimed at responding to “ the ideological challenge we face from 
terrorism and aspects of extremism, and the threat we face from those who promote these views.” 
The Prevent programme  also aims to provide “practical help to prevent people from being drawn 
into terrorism and ensure they are given appropriate advice and support”. LSE must balance its 
existing  legal commitments to uphold academic freedom and (under the Education (No. 2) Act 
1986) freedom of speech within the law against the new Prevent duty, and seek to ensure that its IT 
facilities are not used to draw people into terrorism.  
General Data Protection Regulation  and DPA 2018  
The GDPR has app lied to  the UK from 25 May 2018 , and has been passed explicitly into UK law . The 
UK GDPR reinforces and extends data subjects’ rights as laid out in the Data Protection Act (1998), 
and provides additional stipulations around accountability and governance, breach notification and 
transfer of data. It also extends the maximum penalties liable due to a data breach, from £500,000 
to 4% global turnover.  
The UK GDPR requires LSE to maintain an Information Asset Register, to ensure where personal 
data is voluntarily gathered people are required to explicitly opt in, and can also easily opt out. It 
requires data breaches to be reported to the Information Commissioner’s Office within 72hrs of LSE 
becoming aware of their existence.  
 
3 “Protection of Children Act 1978 (and 1999)”, EURadar  (2011), http://eradar.eu/protection -of-children -act-1978/  [accessed 01/05/15]