IT Change Management Policy & Procedure  
 
Document Type  Policy and Procedure  
Document owner  Director of IT Services  
Approved by  Executive Team  
Approval date  9 November 2023  
Review date  31 October 2025  
Version  2.0  
Amendments  Revisions to all section s to provide clarification  
Related Policies & Procedures  N/A 
 
 
1. SCOPE   
 
1.1 This procedure applies to IT systems and services managed or owned via London.  The 
MRC Units in The Gambia and Uganda will have their own procedures for locally managed 
systems and services.  
1.2 All proposed changes to IT systems or services must follow the IT Change Management 
Procedure.   
1.3 This applies to new digital systems/services and amendment of existing ones.  It includes 
cloud and hosted services, those developed and managed in -house by IT or other LSHTM 
departments .   
1.4 It applies to systems and services employed to support LSHTM’s institutional business 
operations as well as those employed as part of specific research programmes or 
otherwise localised within departments (i.e. managed outside ITS).   
1.5 The “Go Live” of all new and upgraded services will be carried out under the Change 
Management Procedure. Only authorised changes to live systems are permitted and there 
is zero tolerance for unauthorised changes.   
 
2. PURPOSE  
 
2.1 A robust and mandatory change management procedure is required in order to maintain the 
integrity, security and availability of IT systems and services and the data they store and 
process.  
2.2 It is the responsibility of IT Services to manage the lifecycle of all IT systems and services 
supporting LSHTM’s business function.  
2.3 The Change Management Procedure ensures a viable implementation plan is in place, 
adequate testing and success validation has been performed, as well as taking account of 
issues of data protection and cyber security.   
 
3. Change Definition  
 
3.1 A change is defined as anything that alters, modifies or transforms the digital operating 
environment or standard operating procedures of any systems or services that has the 
 
potential to affect the stability and reliability of IT infrastructure or disrupt the business of 
LSHTM.  
3.2 Changes may be required for many reasons, including, but not limited to:   
o User requests   
o Vendor recommended/required changes   
o Changes in regulations   
o Hardware and/or software upgrades   
o Hardware or software failures   
o Changes or modifications to the infrastructure   
o Environmental changes (electrical, air conditioning, data centre, etc)   
o Unforeseen events   
o Periodic Maintenance   
 
3.3 There are two routes for change permitted:   
• Pre-approved (i.e. routine changes not requiring CAB approval)    
• Change Advisory Board (CAB) approved   
 
3.4  There are three categories of change:   
• Routine  – Low risk, low impact usually routine changes that are limited in scope such as 
those frequently carried out or repeatable in nature are pre -authorised and do not require 
CAB approval.  This is the case where there is an accepted/ established procedure t o 
provide a specific change requirement i.e. there is a high degree of confidence in the 
success of the outcome. Routine changes will have a defined trigger to initiate the change.   
 
• Standard  – Changes that cannot be categorised as routine (i.e. they are not low risk/minor 
in scope and there is no pre -established change procedure in place under which the 
change qualifies) will proceed through all steps of the Change Management Procedure.   
There are 3 types dependent on anticipated risk and impact:  
o Minor – low risk (such as a change on a software product which is used infrequently 
by a small group of users in one section at LSHTM e.g. CureME database system)   
o Medium – medium risk such as a change to a piece of software which is used 
heavily by a whole department – e.g. Registry Admin Portal)   
o Major – high risk (such as a change to one of the essential functions or an upgrade 
to a core piece of infrastructure which are LSHTM wide and would potentially impact the 
entire institution e.g.HR/Payroll or the MyFiles storage hosts.  These are usually more 
significant in scope than those categorised as routine changes.    
 
• Emergency – Any unscheduled change requiring immediate implementation to address an 
issue that is causing or likely to cause significant impact to the Business. Emergency 
changes are more prone to disruption and failure and thus must be managed carefully and 
in some  unavoidable situations.  Emergency changes should be notified to the Change 
Manager and a retrospective submission made to the CAB.  Emergency changes have the 
same authorisation procedure as Standard Changes the only difference being that the 
Change Manager (or approved surrogate Change Manager i.e. Team Leader) will circulate 
the request via email and can authorise the Change alongside at least one other member of 
IT Senior Management.  Emergency Changes should not be used for late or poorly pl anned 
change requests and should be only used to urgently fix or avoid a Major Incident (e.g. 
firmware bug on the server infrastructure has resulted in service downtime for MyFiles and 
is affecting all LSHTM users)   
 
 
 
4. CHANGE MANAGEMENT PROCEDURE  
 
4.1 Gateway  
 
• New Services:  
 The initial step for any potential new system is to contact the ITS Business Partners in the 
Information Security and IT Compliance Team.  All enquiries regarding digital requirements 
should be directed to them first. They will guide through the subsequent  governance 
requirements, including SDA approval and/or CISB approval, as well as CAB requirements.  
 
 Note: all governance requirements for the project to implement a new system/service must 
have been met before the Change Management Procedure is undertaken – see separate 
Guidance on the process and definition of Operational Projects.  
 
 
• Existing Service Gateway (for updates or upgrades)  
Either the Business Service Owner for systems owned externally to IT Services, or the 
Technical Service Manager for systems owned by IT Services must first engage with the 
Change Manager in IT Services who will guide through the required process to Go -Live.  
 
For hosted systems (ie cloud based services) the LSHTM Business Service owner would 
be expected to trigger the change management procedure, including approval at CAB, for 
any required changes.  
 
N.B. it should be noted that the formal change management procedure only applies at the 
Go-Live stage on systems and services which are expected to go into a live production 
environment. Test and dev systems do not need to engage in the process.  
 
  
4.2 Determine change category   
 
• For non -routine changes , submit a Request for Change (RfC) via ServiceDesk . (this 
includes changes to systems managed by 3rd parties, such as cloud bases systems). All 
RfCs on ServiceDesk will be set to completed once implemented by selecting the most 
appropriate closure status on the Change Form (from the Operator Window). This  data will 
be used to measure the effectiveness of the Change Management Procedure.  
 
• Emergency Change Requests  
Emergency changes should be notified to the Change Manager by the Change 
Requestor/Implementer at the earliest opportunity.   
 
 The Change Manager should consult members of CAB to obtain approval from at least one 
member before issuing a decision, but it is recognised that this might not always be feasible 
due to time constraints in needing to apply the fix.    
 
 
 Communication regarding Emergency Changes should still happen, (where applicable) so 
that customer expectations can be managed effectively around any unexpected downtime 
and to avoid calls to the Helpdesk.   
 
The Change Requester/Implementer must make a retrospective submission to the CAB.  
Providing an overview of the change made, its success or otherwise, communication to 
date, and the nature of the emergency.  The Change Manager will ensure this is completed .  
 
The Change Manager will investigate patterns of Emergency changes to ensure 
compliance with the Change Management Procedure. Escalating recurring issues to CAB 
and onward to the Director of ITS or the Corporate Information Services Board as required.  
 
 
• Unauthorised Changes  
Unauthorised Changes will be logged and evaluated for continuous improvement purposes.  
 
Post Implementation Reviews (PIRs) will be raised by the Change Manager following 
identification of unauthorised changes to ensure lessons are learnt as part of continuous 
improvement. This will be documented and published as an Action within the RFC on 
ServiceDesk.  
 
  
 
 
5. Flowchart - IT Change Management Procedure    
 
 
 
  

 
 
6. APPENDI X 1 
 
Change Advisory Board – Terms of Reference  
 
Parent  – Corporate IT Services Board (CISB)   
  
Purpose   
• To have oversight of and make informed collective decisions on all substantial 
proposed changes to LSHTM IT systems and services in line with the IT Change 
Management Procedure to ensure an adequate change control environment.     
• This involves evaluating proposed changes to ensure an appropriate roll out plan is 
in place, including: a properly completed RfC, which includes identification of 
dependencies (systems, stakeholders), consideration of risks, impact, cost 
effectiveness, co mmunication to users, testing, and validation of success.    The aim 
is to ensure delivery of a structured approach to the transition of services from the 
current state to desired state with minimal disruption to the customer.   
• To schedule and prioritise changes by ensuring that the proposed implementation 
time is appropriate and does not conflict with the business need, other change or 
operational activities.   
• Make recommendations to reduce risk, increase likely success, and minimise 
business impact, ensure value for money, and build awareness of upcoming 
changes in the user community.   
• To reduce disruption and outages caused by unauthorised, failed or poorly 
considered and managed changes. Improving customer experience.   
• Ensure that business outcomes are documented and well understood and that the 
proposed Change will give the intended outcomes without adversely impacting the 
business.   
• To embed and drive understanding of and compliance with the Change 
Management Procedure across LSHTM.   
• To ensure issues of information governance and cyber security have been duly 
considered where these are a factor in any change request.   
• To enable quick and accurate changes based on business priorities.   
• Highest priority should be given to ensuring LSHTM’s systems and services comply 
with relevant legislation and have adequate steps in place for protection of 
information assets, systems and services from attack.   
• To identify and address any on -going issues, escalating as appropriate to the CISB.   
• To monitor Key Performance Indicators to evaluate the success of LSHTM’s 
Change Management Procedure and control environment.   Use these to inform any 
future amendments to the procedure which will be authorised by CISB.   
o Number of changes implemented in the reporting period broken down of 
changes by system/service   
o Increase in the number of successful Changes   
o Reduction in the number of failed, backed out or cancelled Changes   
 
o Reduction in the number of Major Incidents (outages) resulting from 
Changes   
o Reduction in the number of incidents resulting from Changes   
o Reduction in the number of unauthorised Changes   
o Reduction in the number of unplanned Changes/ emergency Changes   
o Number of Changes rejected by the CAB   
  
 
Membership / Roles & Responsibilities   
The Change Management Procedure is dependent on a number of roles being performed and 
responsibilities being fulfilled as set out below.   
 
Role   Responsibility   
Change Manager   Responsible for the management of RfCs. Chairs the CAB 
meetings   
Change Requestor   Responsible for raising/ submitting the RFC, building and 
implementing the authorised change.   
Technical Service 
Manager   The ITS member of staff responsible for the delivery of the service 
to the Business and approving the RFC.   
ITS Heads of Service   Infrastructure & Architecture, Information Security & Compliance, 
Enterprise Systems & Web Services, Operations and Support   
Business Service Owner   Outside ITS, the person or a delegated representative, with ultimate 
accountability for the provision of a Service to the organisation and 
approving the RFC.   
Project Manager   Responsible for the management of projects and the raising 
of project related RFCs for submission to the appropriate 
CAB.   
ITS Services Manager   Responsible for advising and guiding the Change Requestor 
on the most appropriate communications strategy to be used 
for communicating the proposed changes and its impact.   
 IT Business Partner   Point of contact for advising Faculties and Professional 
Services departments of proposed changes affecting their 
areas.   
  
Project managers or business service owners may be invited to CAB to answer queries on 
the proposed change.   
  
  
Meetings   
• Change Advisory Board will meet every Wednesday at 2pm to review Requests for 
Change.    
• If attendance by a CAB member is not possible, they should either review and 
feedback comments before the CAB or nominate an appropriate delegate to represent 
them.    
• If the Change Requestor is not present at CAB then the change will not be discussed 
and cannot be approved   
• RfCs may be approved by email outside the meeting where proposed by the Change 
Manager and agreed by all CAB members.   
 
 
7. APPENDIX 2  
 
Examples when  a Request for Change submission to CAB  is and is not required:   
  
Routine Change – No RFC   
• Replace single server in a cluster – there is a recognised process for this and no user impact 
is expected, therefore no RFC is required.  
• Replace a single network switch - this has user downtimes so the first time this is required it 
would be submitted as a standard medium change with an RfC   - once the process has 
been seen to be successful this would be switched to a routine change and no further 
RfC is necessary   
• Regular security patches that have been fully tested in the dev environment  
 
N.B. 
• A POC and pilot are generally considered outside of change control when they involve user 
testing as they will bring to the surface many factors that may not have previously been 
considered.   
 
  
Standard Change   
Minor   
• Upgrade to Graphpad Prism – small number of users and is not a regular occurrence. Is user 
affecting  
• Go-live of individual database for a specific team – all new systems that go -live must have an 
RfC, but this is a small service for a small group of users   
  
Medium   
• Upgrade to MyFiles services – used across the institution, not a regular occurrence but is no 
longer used by all staff/students, so would be a  
• Go-live of a new service for a whole department – all new systems that go -live must have an 
RFC and this is used by more than a few users   
  
Major   
• Point release of a business system upgrade (e.g. Agresso 5.x to 6.x) = review release notes, 
talk with Change Manager submit Standard RFC . 
• Point release of an existing hosted service, eg Moodle  - although this is not an LSHTM 
managed service it is under contract, and should therefore be under supplier management 
so would still need to go through the normal RfC process. It is also a heavily used service 
across the whole student body . 
• Go-lice of a new essential function service, eg HR/Payroll – institution wide service with huge 
impact. As with al l go-live situation s a full RfC is required  
  
  
Emergency Change   
  
• Release a fix to a live service that has directly impacted a large number of users (e.g. core 
router has suffered a bug which has prevented all external access - Emergency Change 
where the RFC can be submitted retrospectively   
• Core piece of infrastructure has been identified by the supplier as containing an exploitable 
vulnerability which they have released an emergency fix for (e.g. heartbleed) – this has the 
potential to massively negatively affect LSHTM and as such needs to b e secured rapidly – 
emergency change with eCAB approval and retrospective RfC