A guide to getting started with 
access control
www.getkisi.comIntroduction to 
Access Control Systems
Access Control Systems
Getting started with access control can be overwhelming at ﬁrst with
so many technical terms and things to wrap your head around. But under -
standing access control systems is really an achievable goal - especially after reading this guide. 
This is really a 101 crash course guide for access control systems. If you want 
to get a relatively quick idea of how access control works, you’ve come to the right place.  
If you are new to the world of 
physical access control, you might have some questions like:
All of these questions will be addressed in 
this post including links which contain detailed information for further reading. We've compiled a list with the 30 best 
security magazines and publications  so you 
can get some information as to what is going on in the security market.What are the pieces of 
an access control system and how does it work?
How much should I spend on 
an access control system 
and how does a sample 
quote look like?What are typical reasons why people choose access control?Components
How do I set up a
working access control
system and where do I start?Setup and OperationQuote and CostWho uses an access control system in day to day life?Managing and UsingWhy 

As long as you are carrying an access card or ID badge, it means that your
ofﬁce uses an access systemBut how does it really work? It's difﬁcult since most people have never seen an access system. Most people believe it is just a card reader  on the wall.
Of course there is a little bit more to it in reality. It’s not very difﬁcult though, there are just a few parts behind the scenes that make the magic of easily unlocking a door every time.
Reading this will give you a full and comprehensive understanding how access control 
systems work and the language needed to communicate about it with vendors.
Free vs. Security Consultant
Introduction to 
Access Control SystemsWhen looking at ways to learn fast about security, most people call a local security 
integrator, installer or security consultant. However understanding some basic things about access control systems is really easy when you have resources like this.
Is it absolutely needed that you learn about access control yourself? No, deﬁnitely not. 
However it will save you tons of time when you are into your project allow you to under-stand some of the basic terms commonly used in access control Here is an overview of 
how to find the best security consultant and what to look for
****
https://www.getki-
si.com/blog
What is an access 
control system?
Let’s keep this simple: An access control 
system allows you to manage, monitor and maintain who has access to for example your doors. The simplest form of "access control system" is a standard deadbolt with a brass key. 
Why do we need access control?
The purpose of access control is to provide quick, convenient access control for authorized persons, while at the same time, restricting access for unauthorized people.Here are more reasons why access control is playing a signiﬁcant  role in your organization:
Since the introduction of the 
key some 4000 years ago, much more advanced systems have been introduced. Today there are diﬀerent computer-based, electronic access control system types which we described in an earlier post.Using an access control system allows you to 
manage access or entry to almost anything: ﬁle access, workstation access, printer access and in our case, door, facility, building or ofﬁce access. The standard form of today’s access control is an “access card” instead of the key to grant access to the secured area. In the case of access to larger buildings, the exterior door access is managed by the building while the interior door - or tenant door access is man-aged by the individual tenant company.
Some companies need to be 
compliant with health data regula -
tions (HIPAA)  or credit card data 
regulations  (PCI)  or even with cyber 
standards such as SOC2.being able to pull compliance reports for access control can be a big request.Compliance
If you are working in a compa -
ny with an expensive product or sensitive data. You deﬁnite-ly want to to control who is coming in your facility.IP / Data
If you have a lot of visitors or clients coming in your space, you might be looking for a welcoming experience at the front door or front desk. Access control can not only help but also make your space better!Experience
Access
User-facing side of Access Control
The user facing side - often called “credentials” 
Access credentials in form of access cards, ID badges or smartphone based mobile credentialsWhen presented at a card reader on the wall, it beeps and hopefully you are permitted to access and the door unlocks. The user facing side is what you have on you that gets you the permission. The device on the wall reads your credential or permission. Here an example how that can look with a smartphone as access credential:
This is your electronic “key” and what you have that gets you access.  
It could be access cards, ID badges, ID cards or smartphone based mobile app access. People can use it to gain access through the doors secured by access control systems. The form factor of access cards is the same as credit cards, so it ﬁts in the wallet or purse. However demagnetization is very common with basic access control cards. The beneﬁt of using credentials is that they are personalized, so any unlock event can be tracked back to the person associated with the credential.CredentialsBasic Components
of Access Control systems
Access control systems vary widely in type and complexity. 
However, most card access control systems consist of at least the following basic components: 
Access cards, card reader 
and access control keypadUser-facing
Electric door lock hardware, access control panels, access control server computer and low voltage cablingInfrastructure
Access management dashboard, integrations or APIAdmin-facing
Mounted on the wall, the card reader electronically reads your credentials 
and sends the request to unlock the door with your user credentials to a server. Typically the type of cards used are proximity cards which require the card to be held in a 2” to 6” proximity  to the reader .
Card readers are mounted outside of the perimeter (exterior non-secured wall) next to the door they should be unlocking. In addition to card readers, some access control systems provide the option of using keypads  (PINS) or biometrics instead of cards or smartphones as creden-
tials.  This is rather uncommon, since PINs can easily be passed on and biometrics are harder to manage.Card reader

Management dashboard or portal where 
administrators can manageAdmin-facing side 
of Access Control
The admin facing side is where your ofﬁce 
administrator, head of security or IT manager sets the parameters of who is allowed to access under which circumstances.  This 
involves a management dashboard  (often in 
the cloud  these days) and a way to provision 
access, e.g. a card programming device.
Access Control Infrastructure
Access Ccontrol infrastructure is to most people the most mysterious aspect of access control systems. Obviously there are electronic locks  installed - but what most people don’t know: Those locks are all centrally wired to your IT 
room. This means: A power or signal cable  runs from the lock through the walls into your IT room where the access 
control panel sits. The access control panel gives the lock the signal to unlock when it receives the request to do so by the card reader. There are different topologies (as people call it) but for the basic understanding of access control systems let’s just assume this described ﬂow for now. In more advanced systems the manual operations aspect can 
be automated  - as an example the provisioning and de-provsi -
oining (creating and deleting access) can be done automati-cally by connecting the access dashboard to your company directory of employees. When a new employee shows up in the system, a new access right is automatically provisioned via a directory like Google Apps, Microsoft Azure, SAML or Okta. 
API and integrations  can be used to automate 
manual workﬂows and make operations less prone to 
errors
An overview of Kisi's wiring diagram of a basic access control setup:
Power to lock
Pro ReaderLock
Internet
Switch
Power to kisiCAT6 cableCAT6 cableLock Power 
Supply****
Pro Controller

The access control panel is not visible for most people in a facility since the access control panel (sometimes called 
"access control ﬁeld panel" or "intelligent controller”) is installed in the IT room, electrical , telephone or communi-cations closet (comms room). The reason why it is behind locked doors is because all locks are wired to the access control panel. When a valid card is presented at the card reader, the  door access panel receives the request to 
unlock a speciﬁc relay which is connected to a speciﬁc door wire. When the relay triggers, the lock is being powered  (in the case of fail secure locks) and the door unlocks. This is how the access control panel  control the 
access activity for building doors. How many access control panels have to be provided depends on the number of doors each panel can control. Kisi’s access control panel can control up to 4 doors. If there are more, they can be modularly added next to each other.
Every access control system needs a server where the permissions are stored in an access database . As such it acts 
as the center or “brain” of the access control system. It is really the server which makes the decision if the doors should unlock or not by matching the presented credential to the credentials authorized for this door. The server can be a local windows or linux server, a cloud server or even a decentralized server when credentials are stored in the door reader.The server also tracks and records activity and events regarding access and allows to pull reports of past 
data  events for a given period of time.If a local hosted access control server computer is used, it is typically a 
dedicated machine that runs the access software on it. This is the reason why cloud based systems recently gained a lot of traction since multi-facility management can become complicated with local servers.Locks
Electronic locks are used to electrically unlock the door that 
it is installed on. They typically have a wire that supplies them with power. 
Access Control PanelSome locks open when power is supplied ( fail secure  locks) 
and some locks lock when power is supplied (fail safe  locks). 
The reason for those two types of locks is the following: In the 
event of ﬁre some doors like your front door should open to comply with building and ﬁre codes to allow people to exit the building facility at any time. Other doors like an IT room door are wired fail secure  and should remain locked even during an 
emergency.
In terms of the electronic locks used, we see everything from electronic strikes, electromagnetic locks 
(mag locks), electric exit devices, electriﬁed mortise door lock sets and many more. Based on your door type and construction, the integrator will specify the best lock to install.
Access Control ServerIndependent of the lock installed, they are typically wired back to the access control system panel.
----

Often overlooked but sometimes actually the most expen -
sive part of an access control system when done wrong. 
When building out the space it is important that all the 
necessary cables are speciﬁed , so the general contractor 
knows what to do. If the  cables  are not planned in at this 
point, they need to be added later and someone will have to drill in that newly painted wall or run cables on top of your beautiful walls.
Lets say you have an ofﬁce or building with two doors 
that are on opposite ends of the facility, like a front and back door. 
Currently in use are regular keys to unlock and lock the 
door. The Management is looking to improve security and operations on this facility by implementing an access control system. Reasons for looking into access control systems because your company is growing and you’d like to have more control.
After taking a closer look at the doors that are security 
sensitive, the IT room door came to mind since there are many security related devices and equipment installed. The door leading from the hallway to the IT room should be secured as well. 
A team member is typically tasked with researching 
different access control options and getting bids. The team member is researching a few local vendors to contact who supply and install access control. Typically they will stop by to take a look at your space and the doors to give you an accurate quote for the access control system. Here is a sample of how a one door access control system quote look like:Low Voltage Cables
A simple access control
system quote example
Sample access control quote

(Many installers pack a lot of information into the quote 
and not necessarily provide line items. There are many ways to understand vendor or installer quality and the quote certainly is one of them )Going back to our example: The integration vendor conducts the site survey and determines that in this case there are three card readers needed . For the locks 
installation of two magnetic locks on the glass doors and one electric strike for the IT room door is suggest -
ed.  installation of an access control panel is recom-mended by the installer which connects the door locks to the internet.
Also included is the wiring to connect everything and 
set up the system, a license for maintenance and support which sometimes includes the hosting and a few accessories. Vendors sometimes include a trip charge or service call.
Because the company wants to manage access from 
remote, a cloud-based physical access control system is recommended . This allows logging on to a web 
based portal from any browser and - given the correct credentials are presented - to make changes to the access rights and share or revoke access from remote.Again, the most important thing about quotes is that you get line items so you understand what is being done.  If the 
access control installer lumps everything together in one sum like above they sometimes ballpark the numbers and don’t specify the brand of hardware they use It is of high importance to clarify at this point if the quote includes a Certiﬁcate of Insurance (COI)  which you can ask 
your building management if you are required to have this for incoming vendors. This makes sure possible damages by a vendor up to a certain amount are covered.
Once you found the access control system you like, what happens next? How does the system get installed in your space? 
Access Control System 
Setup and Operation
If you don’t run the cables you can’t connect anything, so 
it really makes sense to start with running the internet, power and signal cables ﬁrst.Run the cables 
Depending on what type of door you have, the integrator will either install a magnetic lock, electric strike or electriﬁed mortise lock. This might involve cutting into the door-frame which is why sometimes it makes sense to do ﬁrst so the ofﬁce workers are not annoyed in the middle of the dayInstall the locksIf there is a server to set up, it’s typically done after everything is installed so the software can be conﬁgured and tested if all doors unlock correctly.Setup and testing
Mostly the just have to be screwed on the wall and connected to power. Some readers like the Kisi IP reader need internet connection and would have to be connected to the internet.**** Install the readers at the door
If you have two doors, you will be able to live with one access control panel because most of them can handle multiple doors. The integrator might install a backup power supply or other additional security hardware depending on your building’s speciﬁcations.Install the access control
panel in your IT roomHere is the answer:   Typically installers take a few days from conﬁrmation of the order till actual installation 
because they need to order the parts needed for the installation. Once you have an actual installation date, you’ll ﬁnd that the installer will do the following:
Access
*****
Once you have the door access system set up - you might run through the following steps to roll out the 
access control to your organization:Using the Access 
Control System
****
****
****
Send an email to everyone to announce the change in access 
control. People don’t like change - some might have an emotional bond to their physical key, so make sure to be ready for pushback and highlight why this makes your workplace safer and your company more secure in general. Everyone should be able to agree to this.Announce the roll-outUnder certain conditions you want the user not to be able to unlock the door and so on. Pro tip: Many ofﬁces get broken into during vacation days. Some ofﬁces automatically unlock their doors during work days. If the work day is a public holiday, burglars know they might just be able to walk in.Set up the rules in your 
access control software and test if they workTry running through the process that you envision for every 
employee or visitor. Provision access for them, activate their access, hand over the access card or share access with them, then see if it works for them. If you roll out too quickly your process might have some smaller hiccups and the more people you involve, the faster the problem multiplies.Test the system with a few pilot 
candidates or coworkersSet up a door access schedule
****
Once the system is tested, announced and approved 
the fun part begins: The actual roll out. You can start provisioning access for your team. The most important to consider is that some people will have issues or problems getting access, so make sure to roll out on a day that is not the most critical - most people choose fridays so there is time to troubleshoot.Onboard your team
When should some doors unlock, when should they be able to accessible in general and which types of access groups or individuals should be able to gain access.  Are IT managers are allowed to access all doors? What about executives? Are they allowed in the ofﬁce 24/7? It’s a good exercise to discuss this with your security, facilities and management team as these rules is what your entire access control strategy will be based on, i.e. it will determine what you actually want to control. 
Because the company wants to manage access from remote, a cloud-based physical access control system is 
recommended. This allows logging on to a web based portal from any browser and - given the correct credentials are presented - to make changes to the access rights and share or revoke access from remote.
Kisi Mobile Credentials.Door Status
Monitoring FeatureAutomatic UnlockFeatureReporting Feature
****
Check out Kisi's product pages for more advanced features:
Kisi Access Reader Kisi IP Control Panel Kisi Cloud Access Dashboard
https:/ /getkisi.com
https:/ /getkisi.com
https:/ /getkisi.com/how-it-works
https:/ /getkisi.com/how-it-works

Discover Kisi in action
We would love to hear from youWe provide an easy-to-manage , scalable system to regulate 
security for businesses of all sizes.. The best access control 
systems combine  top-notch software with the right 
hardware
Get in touch with our sales team with a brief summary 
of your needs and we would get back to you within one business day
How it Works
Contact Us
https:/ /www.getkisi.com/contact-us
https:/ /www.getkisi.com/pricing
https:/ /www.getkisi.com/how-it-works
Flexible Pricing & Quotes 
Get a tailored quote that ﬁts your business location and 
needs. All paid plans come with a 30-day trial window and we also ship and install with remarkable speed
View Pricing Plans
646-663 -4880 
sales@getkisi. com 
CAL L US
EMAIL 
https:/ /www.getkisi.com/pricing