OT Cloud  Services  Acceptable  Use Policy   Page  1 of 3   
 
Acceptable Use Policy  
1. INTRODUCTION  
The purpose of this Acceptable Use Policy  (“AUP ”) is to describe the acceptable conduct in using OpenText cloud s ervices 
(“Services”), as well as such conduct that is unacceptable and not permitted. If you have any questions regarding this AUP, 
please contact us at https://www.opentext.com/contact .   
Each Customers is responsible for its violations  of this AUP and violations  by its Authorized Users. In the interest  of maintaining  
a high quality service for Customers and the general public. OpenText asks everyone subject to this AUP to report any 
suspected violation of this AUP to OpenText  at https://www.opentext.com/contact . 
Subject to applicable  laws and  the respective Cloud  Services Agreement,  OpenText:  
• will, in its discretion, enforce compliance with  this AUP  through monitoring the use of  the Services and may take any 
of the actions described in Section 5 below, including suspending or terminating an individual user account or the full Services;  
• may cooperate with legal  authorities  and/or third parties  in the investigation of  any suspected or alleged crime or civil 
wrongdoing;  
• may remove any Material where OpenText determines it  to be  necessary to comply with the law or  which may subject 
OpenText to liability or which may violate this AUP.  
OpenText  does  not exercise editorial  control  over any Customer  Material  processed, created  or accessible using the 
Services. Customer is solely  responsible for losses which result  from Customer Material or violation of this  AUP. 
OpenText’s failure to enforce this AUP, for whatever reason, shall not be construed as a waiver of its right to do so at any time.  
2. GENERAL  USE,  SECURITY,  AND BACK UP 
Effective prevention of harm to users of  the Services or to the Service itself requires the participation of every individual user:  
2.1 Password. Your password provides access to your account. You are responsible for keeping your password secure, 
and you may not share your password and account access , including account name(s), passwords, personal 
identification  numbers  (“PIN”), security tokens  or similar  information or  devices  used for  identification  and 
authorization purposes , with unauthorized users.  You must immediately  notify  OpenText  in the event  you become  
aware of, or suspect,  any unauthorized use of a user account  or account  password issued to you or any other breach 
of security. You must adopt adequate security measures to prevent or minimize unauthorized use of your account, 
including choosing a password that is not easy to guess  and changing it regularly .  
2.2 User Authentication. You may  not attempt to circumvent user authentication or security of any  host, network  or 
account. This includes, but is not limited to, accessing data not  intended for you, logging into or making use of a 
server, account , software  or service you are not expressly authorized to access, or probing the security of other 
servers, accounts, software, services or networks. Use or distribution of tools  designed for or which have the 
functionality of compromising security is prohibited.  Examples  of these tools  include,  but are not limit ed to, password  
guessing  tools , cracking tools  or network  probing tools.  You may not attempt  to interfere with service to any user, host  
or network. This includes, but is not limited to, “flooding” of networks, deliberate attempts  to overload  a service,  denial  
of service attacks  and attempts  to “crash” a host.  Users who violate service, systems or network security may incur 
criminal or  civil liability.  OpenText  will cooperate with investigations of violations  of other services, systems or network 
security, including cooperating with law enforcement authorities in the investigation of suspected criminal violations.  
2.3 Backup. In addition to the backup efforts utilized by OpenText , as may be further detailed in the Cloud Services 
Agreement, OpenText  recommends  you perform  regular  backups  of your data and regularly  perform  a data “dump”  
(archive) of all your files stored in the Services. Any sensitive  or important files should be backed up on your local 
computer system or storage facilities/services prior to uploading them to the Services.  
3. UNA CCEPTABLE CONDUCT  
If your use of the Services causes harm to the Services or causes harm to others or if you encourage, facilitate , or assist any 
third party, or if you do any of the following, you will be in violation of this  AUP: 
3.1 engage in activity  that harms  or disrupts  the operation or performance of the Services;  
3.2 misrepresent your identity, impersonate any person or attempt to gain access to or illegally track any account, user, 
data, device,  service, system, or network related to the Services;  
3.3 use or manipulate the Services in any manner  not expressly permitted by OpenText ; 
3.4 use the Services in a manner that results in excessive bandwidth usage, as determined by OpenText (see also 
Section 4 below);  

OT Cloud  Services  Acceptable  Use Policy   Page  2 of 3  3.5 use the Services and/or upload or download any Material to or from the Services for  any illegal purpose,  or to publish,  post,  
share,  copy,  store,  backup or distribute any illegal  files or data, including infringing, obscene, threatening, libelous, or 
otherwise unlawful or tortious Material, including Material that is harmful to children or that violates  privacy rights;  
3.6 use the Services to publish,  post,  share,  copy,  store,  backup or distribute Material  protected by intellectual  property 
rights of a third party unless you own or have necessary rights to such Material;  
3.7 use the Services to publish, post, share, create, copy, store, backup or distribute Material that contains viruses, 
worms, time  bombs,  Trojan horses  and other  harmful  or malicious  code,  files, scripts,  agents  or any other  similar  
software that may damage the operation of the Services or another person’s device, service  or property;  
3.8 use or upload any Material, including but not limited to, code that as a condition for use may require disclosure or 
mandatory licensing of proprietary or other code (including source code) ; any Material  used or uploaded by Customer 
in connection with the  access and use of the Services must : (i) comply with OpenText  and other applicable license  
and service terms;  and (ii) not  disrupt or cause harm to any of OpenText’s  or any third party’s systems or 
environment s.  
3.9 engage in online activities  that would permit or encourage other  parties  to cause damage to the Services;  
3.10  except as expressly permitted under applicable law, directly or indirectly reverse engineer, decompile, disassemble, 
modify, reproduce or create derivative works of the Services;  
3.11  alter or modify  or bypass  any disabling mechanism,  which  may be included in Services,  including  tampering with the 
security of the Services or tampering  with other customer accounts of OpenText;  
3.12  assign,  sublicense,  rent, timeshare,  loan,  lease or otherwise transfer  the Services;  
3.13  remove or alter any proprietary notices ( e.g., copyright, trademark notices, legends, etc.) from the Services or copy 
any ideas, features, functions, or graphics of the Services;  
3.14  build or assist  someone else to build a competitive  solution using similar  ideas,  features,  functions,  or graphics  of the  
Service,  or allow  any person or entity  that offers  or provides  services that are competitive to or with OpenText’s 
products and/or services to use or access the Services, or encourage any other Customer to use a service that 
competes with the Services;  
3.15  use the Services to send unsolicited  advertising and/or  promotional  materials,  including,  without  limitation,  ‘spam’ or 
bulk e-mail, including without limitation any use of the Services in violation of the Telephone Consumer Protection  
Act, the Junk  Fax Prevention  Act, or the CAN-SPAM Act, as well as the laws and regulations  implementing the 
“Privacy and Electronic  Communications”  directive issued by  the European Union (2002/58/EC)  and any replacement 
legislation;  
3.16  attempt  to probe,  scan  or test the vulnerability  of the Services or to breach  the security or authentication measures 
without proper authorization;  
3.17  use the Services or upload any Material to the Services in furtherance of or in connection with any activity  that violates  
applicable  local, state or national laws  and regulations , including, but, not limited to : (i) export  and import control laws 
of Canada, the United States, the European Union, or other countries ; (ii) export restrictions administered by the 
U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Industry and Security; (iii) economic and trade sanctions imposed by the 
U.S. Department of Treasury Office of Foreign Asset Control ; (iv) laws relating to data privacy, international 
communications and the transmission of data; or  
3.18  use any artificial intelligence (AI) system provided with the Services to:  (i) generate content that may harm or promote 
the harm of individuals or a group, such as: facilitating methods of harassment or bullying to intimidate, abuse, or 
insult others; or generating content that may have unfair or adverse impacts on people, part icularly impacts related 
to sensitive or protected characteristics; (ii) make automated decisions in domains that affect material or individual rights or well -being ( e.g., finance, l egal, employment, healthcare, housing, insurance, and social welfare) ; (iii) mislead 
others into thinking that generative AI content was created by a human. Unacceptable risk us age (as defined in the 
EU AI Act or per industry standards) is prohibited.  
4. NETWORK PERFORMANCE  
The Services, and accounts provided thereon, operate on shared network resources. Excessive use or abuse of these shared 
network  resources by  one user may have a negative  impact on  all other  users.  You are prohibited from misusing network 
resources in a manner that impairs network performance.  
5. CONSEQUENCES  OF VIOLATIONS  OF THIS  AUP 
OpenText  may take action in response to complaints,  including but not limited  to any one or more  of the following:  
5.1 written  or verbal  warnings;  
5.2 suspend certain  access privileges;  
5.3 suspend your user account  or the Services;  
5.4 terminate your user account  or a respective  Cloud Services  Agreement;  
5.5 bill you for any administrative costs and/or  reactivation  charges;  
OT Cloud  Services  Acceptable  Use Policy   247-000013-001  5.6 bring legal  action to enjoin or prohibit further  violations  and/or  to collect  damages,  if any, caused by violations  of this 
AUP; or 
5.7 take any action  as directed  by a governmental  agency,  court, regulator or law enforcement  agency  having jurisdiction.  
6.GENERAL  TERMS
6.1 THE TERMS OF YOUR USE OF THE SERVICES, AND CERTAIN  LIMITATIONS  OF LIABILITY, EXCLUSION OF
WARRANTIES, AND INDEMNIFICATION ARE DETAILED IN THE CLOUD SERVICES AGREEMENT BETWEEN 
OPENTEXT AND YOU OR YOUR COMPANY. IN THE CASE OF ANY CONFLICT BETWEEN THIS AUP AND  THE 
CLOUD SERVICES AGREEMENT, THE TERMS OF THE  CLOUD SERVICES AGREEMENT SHALL CONTROL.  
6.2 You acknowledge that you have read this AUP and understand it and agree to be bound by all its terms and 
conditions. If  any provision of this AUP is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be contrary to law, the provision 
shall be modified by the court and interpreted so as best to accomplish the objectives of the original provision to the 
fullest extent permitted by law, and the remaining provisions of the AUP shall remain in effect . The parties  intend that 
the provisions  of this AUP be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law. Accordingly, the parties agree 
that if any provisions are deemed not enforceable, they shall be deemed modified to the extent necessary to make 
them enforceable and in such manner as  comes  closest  to the intentions  of the parties  to this AUP  as is possible.  
This AUP will inure to the benefit of and be binding upon the parties, their permitted successors and assigns.  
7.INTERPRETATION
In this AUP, unless  the context  requires  otherwise, capitalized terms set out herein have the following meanings.
7.1 “Authorized  User ” means  any employee or contractor  of Customer  or other  individual  or entity  who is authorized by 
Customer to access and use the Services or who use the Services under Customer’s account.  
7.2 “Cloud Services Agreement ” means any subscription services agreement between Customer and OpenText 
regarding the provision of Services by OpenText.  
7.3 “Customer ”, “you”, and “ your ” means the Customer authorized under a Cloud Services Agreement to access and 
use the Services and includes the Customer’s Authorized Users.  
7.4 “Material ” means all forms of communication, data, code or content , including, but not limited to,  documents, 
graphics , images, , software, software code or executable programs, Customer -created code or content, audio  or 
video recordings, and anything  Customer  or its users creates, uploads, store s, sends, receive s, or shares through  
the Services. Customer is responsible for complying with all terms of use for any Material  when using the Services.  
7.5 “OpenText ” means OpenText Corporation and/or any subsidiary or affiliate of Open Text Corporation. 
OPENTEXT MAY  REVISE THIS  POLICY  AT ANY TIME,  INCLUDING  BY POSTING A NEW  VERSION AT THIS  
WEBSITE ww w.opentext.com/agreements . 
Revision:  July 1 , 2024