P09 
 
 
 1                                    
 
1. Information Security Logging and Monitoring P olicy   
Issued: May 3, 20 19 
Last Revised: July  1, 2021 
Last Reviewed: November 11 , 2022 
  
2. Policy Purpose  
This Information Security Logging and Monitoring Policy establishes the security requirements for 
logging and monitoring of information security -related events on University of Southern California (USC) 
information systems . 
3. Scope and Application  
This policy applies to all:  
• University faculty members (including part -time and visiting faculty)  
• Staff and other employees (such as postdoctoral scholars, postdoctoral fellows, and student 
workers)  
• iVIP (guests with electronic access), as well as any other users of the network infrastructure, 
including independent contr actors or others (e.g., temporary agency employees) who may be 
given access on a temporary basis to university systems  
• Third parties, including vendors, affiliates, consultants, and contractors  
4. Definitions  
Term  Definition  
Confidential  Data that typically includes regulated data requiring compliance  
efforts if exposed to unauthorized parties, or would cause legal,  
financial, reputational, operational harm if disclosed  
Confidential -
Controlled Data  Data that is a sub -category of Confidential and is to be used only for  
Covered Defense Information, which includes Controlled Technical  
Information (CTI), Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI), or any  
other information that has military or space application where the  
data provider ( e.g. research sponsor) has imposed safeguarding or  
dissemination controls for reasons of national security  
High Value Asset (HVA)  USC information systems that create, process, transmit or store  
High Value Information (HVI)  
High Value Information 
(HVI)  Data that if inappropriately disclosed, accessed, used, disrupted,  
modified or destroyed, could cause significant impact, as defined by  
the Information Risk Standard, to USC’s reputation and public  
confidence. High Value Information (HVI) could be Confidenti al, 
Internal Use, or Public data  
Information Security  
Governance, Risk, 
Compliance (IS GRC)  A combination of three approaches that organizations use to 
demonstrate compliance with international standards, global rules, laws, 
and state regulations. Governance, risk management, compliance (GRC) 
  P09 
 
 
 2                                    
 
is often implemented by companies that are growing glo bally to 
maintain consistent policies, processes, and procedures across all parts 
of the organization  
ITS Information Technology Services  
OCISO  Office of the Chief Information Security Officer  
System Owner  The individual responsible for the overal l procurement,  
development, integration, modification, operation, maintenance, and  
retirement of an information system. The System Owner is a key  
contributor in developing system design specifications to ensure the  
security and user operational needs are d ocumented, tested, and  
implemented  
For more definitions and terms: USC Information Security Policies Terms and Glossary  
 
5. Policy Details  
Objective  
The objective of this policy is to define information security logging and monitoring requirements for 
USC Confidential data and High Value Information (HVI), as defined in the Data Protection Policy . 
5.1 In collaboration with OCISO, System Owners will help define information security events to be 
logged (e.g., user activity, system failure and  logon errors) for any systems handling Confidential 
data, Confidential- Controlled data and High Value Information (HVI) as defined in the Data 
Protection Policy.  
5.2 System Owners will, as defined in section 2.1, log all identified information security event s, user 
activities, and other identified logging requirements related to systems that process, store, or 
transmit Confidential data, Confidential- Controlled data and High Value Information (HVI) data, 
as defined in the Data Protection Policy (e.g., network  devices, servers, databases, faults or 
failures, errors). System Owners will use OCISO services, as it relates to Confidential data, Confidential- Controlled data and High Value Information (HVI) data as defined in the Data 
Protection Policy, to maintain and monitor security logs for data stored in cloud platforms and Software -as-a-Service (SaaS) solutions.   
5.3 When technically feasible, System Owners will use OCISO services to ensure information security event logs are aggregated and correlated using an auto mated and centralized security 
event monitoring system.   
5.4 System Owners will ensure information security event logs do not contain any Confidential data, 
as defined in the Data Protection Policy. If event logs are required to be shared, they must be 
sanitized in a manner consistent with industry standards, prior to disclosure.  
5.5 System Owners will ensure information security event logs are retained for a predefined time period in accordance with legal and regulatory requirements and USC's Record Management 
Policy.  
5.6 System Owners will ensure information security event logs are protected from unauthorized access, as defined in the Access Management Policy.   
  P09 
 
 
 3                                    
 
5.7 System Owners will use OCISO services to ensure information security event logs are reviewed 
and analyze d on a periodic basis through the use of log harvesting, parsing, alerting tools or a 
manual process . 
6. Procedures  
None 
7. Forms  
None 
8. Responsibilities  
All Faculty and Staff are required to comply with this policy.  
 
9. Related Information  
Compliance Measurement  
The Office of the CISO and the Office of Audit Services will collectively monitor compliance with this policy, USC’s information security policies and standards, and applicable federal and state laws and regulations using various methods, including but not  limited to periodic policy attestations. Compliance 
with information security policies will be monitored regularly in conjunction with USC’s monitoring of its information security program. Audit Services will conduct periodic internal audits to ensure com pliance.   
 Exceptions  
Any exceptions to the policy will be submitted and approved in accordance with the Information Risk 
Committee decision criteria by the OCISO Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance. Exceptions 
will be requested via email to the OCISO Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance team 
at infosecgrc@usc.edu.   
 
Non -Compliance   
Violation of this policy may lead to this being classified as a serious misconduct, which is grounds for 
discipline in accordance with the Faculty Handbook, s taff employment policies, and the Studen t 
Handbook , as appropriate. Any disciplinary action under this policy will consider the severity of the 
offense and the individual’s intent and could include termination of access to the USC network, USC 
systems and/or applicatio ns, as well as employment actions up to and including termination, and 
student disciplinary actions up to and including expulsion.  
 
10. Contacts  
Please direct any questions regarding this policy to:  
OFFICE  PHONE  EMAIL  
Office of the Chief Information 
Security Officer   trojansecure@usc.edu