Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020    
VENDOR MANAGEMENT POLICY  
1. PURPOSE:    Due to the specialized expertise needed to design, implement and service new technologies, 
vendors may be needed to provide resources that the university is unable to provide on its own.  This could 
include consulting services, Software -as-a-Service (SaaS), new application implementations or existing 
application upgrades.  
 
2. SCOPE:    This policy applies to all vendor engagements including, but not limited to any software purchase that 
is accompanied by a contract or agreement.  
 
3. POLICY:   No software or service contract may be entered into by a university employee without prior 
approval/review by the Chief Information Officer (CIO), the Vice President for University Operations and Vice 
President and General Counsel.  All new vendors with Software -as-a-Service (SaaS) must conform to the 
requirements in the Cloud Application and Infrastructure Policy . 
 
4. GUIDANCE:  
a. Statement of Work (SOW):  
• Must clearly state the security requirements for the vendors to ensure that their work is consistent 
with the University policies.  
• Must include a clear description of the scope of services provided under the contract.  
• Must clearly identify all types of sensitive data to be exchanged and managed by the vendor.   
• Must contain a documented System Security Plan which describes all existing and planned security 
controls.  
• Depending on the type of work being performed Information Services (IS) may require the vendor to 
submit a Higher Education Cloud Vendor Assessment Tool – Lite (HECVAT -Lite).  A copy of this form 
can be obtained from IS  
• If this is an online tool an Accessibility Conformance Report need s to be submitted to ensure ADA 
compliance is present.  
b. Agreements and Contracts:  
• Must contain a documented System Security Plan which describes all existing and planned security 
controls.  
• Contracts that include exchange of sensitive data must University confidentiality agreements to be 
executed by the vendor, must identify applicable University policies and procedures to which the 
vendor is subjected, and must identify security incident rep orting requirements.  
• Contracts must clearly identify security reporting requirements that stipulate that the vendor is 
responsible for maintaining the security of sensitive data, regardless of ownership.  
• Contracts must include formal sanctions or penalties for failure to meet the security requirements in 
the contract or purchase document.  
• Information Services shall provide the appropriate security reporting contact information to each 
vendor upon contract initiation.  

   
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  • Upon termination of vendor services, contracts must require the return or destruction of all University 
of Portland data.  Information Services is to immediately ensure termination of all access to University 
information systems and, if applicable, facilit ies housing these systems.  
c. Reporting Requirements:  
• In the event of a breach of the security of the sensitive data, the vendor is responsible for immediately 
notifying and working with IS regarding notification, recovery and remediation.  
• Security reporting requirements in the contract must also require the vendor to report all suspected 
loss or compromise of sensitive data exchanged pursuant to the contract within 24 hours of the 
suspected loss or compromise.  
• The vendor is responsible for notifying all persons whose sensitive data may have been compromised 
because of the breach as required by law.  
• All contracts shall require the vendor to produce regular reports focusing on four primary potential 
risk areas:  
o Unauthorized Systems Access  
o Compromised Data  
o Loss of Data Integrity  
o Inability to Transmit or Process Data  
o Exception Reporting  
Any exceptions from normal activity are to be noted in the reports, reviewed, and the appropriate 
responses determined.  
d. Security and Data Risk Assessment:  In general, contracts for software and other services delivered from 
cloud vendors are reviewed by Information Services for security and accessibility compliance.  New 
vendors are required to fill out a Higher Education Cloud Vendor Assessment Tool – Lite (HECVAT -Lite) and 
a Voluntary Product Accessibility Template (VPAT) supplied by Information Services . For more details, 
please reference the  ‘Technology Purchasing  Policy ’, the ‘Cloud  Application & Infrastructure Policy’ , and the 
‘Data Risk Classification Guidelines ’ found on the Information Services Policies website  at 
https://www.up.edu/is/is -policies . 
5. EXCEPTIONS:   There  are no other exceptions for this policy . 
 
5. SAN CTIONS:  Accounts  and network  access  may  be administratively  suspend ed by the University  with  or 
without  notice  when,  in the University’s  judgment,  continued  use of the University’s  resources  may  interfere  
with  the work  of others,  place  the University  or others  at risk, or violate  University  policy.  Any violation  of this 
policy  by a student  may  lead  to disciplinary  charges  under  the appropriate  student  disciplinary  policy,  which  
may  include  expulsion  or suspension  of student  status.  Faculty  and staff  violations  will be addressed  by their  
respective  disciplinary  policies  and procedures.  All known  and/or  suspected  violations  will be reported  to the 
Vice  President  for University O perations . Users of University of Portland computing facilities are subject not 
only to University Policies, but also to applicable local, state and federal laws .