Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020   
 
CHANGE MANAGEMENT POLICY  & PROCEDURES GUIDE  
 
1. PURPOSE: Ensuring effective change management within the University’s production technology  environment 
is extremely important in ensuring quality delivery of Information Services. The intent of this Policy and 
Procedures Guide is to ensure the effective management of change while reducing risk . 
 
2. SCOPE: This policy applies to all production systems and the Information Services staff who manage them 
including but not limited to all production data bases, servers, and application layers.  
 
3. POLICY:  Key components to the University’s Change Management program include:  
 
a. Accurate Documentation : Identify the information relevant to a specific change that needs to be 
collected throughout the change management process.  
 
b. Continuous Oversight : Change Advisory Board (CAB) The CAB is tasked with balancing the need for 
change with the need to minimize risks.  
 
c. Formal, Defined Approval Process : All changes will follow the established multiple level approval process 
to ensure routine changes are completed with minimum restrictions while complex, high impact changes 
receive the oversight necessary to guarantee success.  
 
d. Scope : Establish the specific areas that this policy will cover. Examples include Payroll and HR 
Applications, Event management Applications, Accounting and Business Applications. Also included are all 
changes associated with hardware and software changes (networ k, client server, SAN and Banner).  
 
4. PROCESS: IS Change Management is the process of requesting, analyzing, approving, developing, 
implementing, and reviewing a planned or unplanned change within the IS infrastructure. The Change 
Management Process begins with the creation of a Change Request within t he University’s selected 
technology platform. It ends with the satisfactory implementation of the change and the communication of 
the result of that change to all interested parties  
 
The primary goal of the IS change management organization is to accomplish IS changes in the most efficient 
manner while minimizing the business impact, costs, and risks.  All IS changes within the University will be 
documented in ServiceNow. To achieve this, the change management process includes the following primary 
steps (note that all information collected in the steps below is documented in a  Change Record created in 
ServiceNow):  
 
a. Formally Request a Change : All requests for change will be documented within ServiceNow  by creating a 
new request for change (RFC).  The completion of a new RFC will be completed by the Change 
Coordinator.  
 
b. Categorize and Prioritize the Change : The Change Coordinator will assess the urgency and the impact of 
the change on the infrastructure, end user productivity, and budget.  
 
c. Analyze and Justify the Change : The Change Coordinator works with the change requester and the 
change initiator to develop specific justification for the change and to identify how the change may 
impact the infrastructure, business operations, and budget. The Change Coordinators use thi s information 

   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  to further research and develop a risk and impact analysis. When completing the analysis of the change, 
the Change Coordinator must ensure they consider the business as well as the technical impacts and risks.  
 
d. Testing and Roll -Back plans :  The Change Coordinator works with the change requester and the 
change initiator to develop a Roll -Back plan if the change is not successful, as well as a post 
implementation testing plan.  
 
e. Approve and Schedule the Change : The Change Coordinator uses ServiceNow  to route the Request 
for Change (RFC) to the Change Advisory Board (CAB) for approval or rejection of the change.  
Emergency changes can be routed and approved by a Director level and above, thus bypassing the 
CAB. 
 
f. Plan and Complete the Implementation of the Change : This process includes developing the 
technical requirements, reviewing the specific implementation steps and then completing the change 
in a manner that will minimize impact on the infrastructure and end users.  
 
g. Post -Implementation Review : A post -implementation review is conducted to ensure whether the 
change has achieved the desired goals. Post -implementation actions include deciding to accept, 
modify or back -out the change; contacting the end user to validate success; and finalizing the c hange 
documentation within the company’s selected technology platform.  
 
5. PROCESS SCOPE:  Because  the Change  Management  Process  deals  with the management  of changes  in 
the producti on envir onment , it is impera tive that both  custom ers and the University’s  change  
organizat ion unde rstand the even ts that are cons idere d withi n the scope of the process.  In this section, 
the scope  is describ ed and includes  areas  which  are both withi n and outside of the change management  
process  scope.  
 
a. In Scope : The intended  scope of the Change  Management  Process is to cover  all the University’s  
computing  systems  and platforms.  The primary  function al components  covered  in the Change  
Management  process  include:  
 
• SDLC  – Change s handle d through  the form al softwar e development  life cycle will be included  
within  the company’ s change management  program.  
 
• Hardware  – Installation,  modification,  rem oval or relocat ion of computing  equipment.  
 
• Software  – Installation,  Pa t ches  to no n -red un da n t s ys tem s, Se rv ice  Pa cks , upgrade  
or removal  of software  products  including  operating  systems,  acces s methods,  commercial  off-
the-shelf  (COTS)  packages,  internally  developed  packages  and utilitie s. 
 
• Database  – Changes to databases  or files such as additions,  reorgani zations  and major  
mainten ance.  
 
• Applicat ion – Application  changes  being  promoted  to production  as well  as the integr ation of 
new application  systems and the remova l of obsolete  elements. 
 
• Moves, Adds, Changes and Deletes  – Changes to system  configuration.  
 
• Telepho ny – Installation,  modification,  de-installation,  or relocati on of VoIP  equipment  and 
services.  
 
• Networking  – Installation,  modification,  de-installation,  or relocati on of major network services 
   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  including Firewall and Router changes . 
 
b. Out of  Scope : There  are many  IS tasks  performed  at the University,  either  by the IS department  or by 
the end users that do not fall under  the policies  and procedures  of Change Management.  Tasks that 
require  an operational  process,  but are outside  the initial  scope of the universities  Change  Management  
policy  include:  
 
• Contingency/Disaster  Recovery  
• Change s to non-production  element s or resources 
• Certain changes to redundant systems including moves, adds, deletes.  
• Changes  made  within  the daily  adm inistrative  process.  Examples  of daily  administrative  tasks  are: 
o Passwo rd resets 
o User  adds /deletes  
o User modifications  
o Adding,  deleting  or revising  secu rity grou ps 
o Rebooting  machine s when there is no chan ge to the configuration  of the system 
o File permission  changes 
o Security Patches  
o Switch and Wi -Fi hardware swaps  
 
NOTE: The Change Advisory Board (CAB) may modify the scope periodically to include items in the scope 
of the University’s overall Change Management policy . 
 
6. PROCEDURES:  
 
a. Assigning  the Change Prior ity: The Chang e Managemen t system has been designed  to default  to a 
rout ine priority  for the end user community.  The Chang e Coordinat or will have auth ority to adjus t the 
priority  level as required  to meet  the business needs. Ther e are four  levels of Chang e priorities  whic h 
include:  
 
• Eme rgency – A chang e that,  if not implemented  immed iately, will leave the organizat ion open  to 
significant  risk (for example , applying  a security  patch, or a system down).  
 
• High – A chan ge that  is important  for the orga nizatio n and must be impl emented  soon  to prevent  
a significant  negati ve impact  to the ability  to conduct  business.  
 
• Routin e – A change  that  will be implemented  to gain benefit  from  the change d servi ce. 
 
• Low – A change that is not pressing  but would  be advantageous.  
 
NOTE : Eme rgency  changes  must  be kept to an absolut e minimu m due to the increased  risk involved  in 
implementing  them.  
 
b. Lead  Time  Guidelines : It is essentia l that  request s for change  are submitted  and approved  in a timely  
manner.  This will allow completion  of accur ate documentat ion, change proc essing  and obtaining  the 
approvals  in sufficient  time  prior  to the requested  implementat ion date, and provide  for conflict  
resolution  for schedulin g of changes.  
 
Lead times  are the num ber of days an action  (Initiation  or Appr oval ) must be completed  prior  to the 
   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  reque sted implement ation date.  The num ber of days may vary depending  on the priority  and the risk 
level . Preferably, high  risk and/or  large  chan ge requests should  have  several  weeks  (or even months ) 
notice  prior  to the requested  implementation  date.  Lead Time s for each chang e will vary depending  on 
the type  of chang e. Change  Initiators  should  plan lead times  to allow  sufficient  time for planning,  
review,  and approval.  In some cases, lead times  would  also need to be planne d to allow for standar d 
impl ementat ion times that  have been set for certain proce sses. 
 
Determine need for 
Production changeIs change SOP? Complete task YES
Follow Deployment 
Request process and 
submit to CABNO
CAB Approves? NOCommunicate 
Change
Deploy changes
Post implementation 
review with CABYES
Need for follow-
up change?
Close ticketNOIs change an 
Emergency?YES NO
Follow Deployment 
Request process and 
submit to Director or 
CIO
Mgmt. 
Approves?NO YES
Change Management Overview
10-18-2012
Joey HouckTest and Validate 
changesCommunicate Status 
of Change to End 
Users and Update 
RFC in ZendeskPassCollect Additional 
Information as 
RequiredCollect Additional 
Information as 
Required
Change 
Successful?
YESNOPerform Backout 
Plan
FailYes
Cancel Change
YES
Failed Change
 
 
c. Developi ng the Roll-Back  Plan: Developme nt of the Roll-Back  plan is essential  to ensuring  effecti ve 
recovery in the event of a failed  change.  The Roll-Back  plan  is primarily  based on the technical  impact  
analysi s and the implementati on plan.  A Roll -Back plan should be developed prior to submitting the 
RFC.  
 
d. Developing the Testing Plan : All change  categories  will undergo  som e level of testing  depending  on the 
complexity  of the change. Once the chang e is built,  configu red and integrated  in the development  
envir onme nt, the chang e is moved  to the Test/QA  envir onment.  This phas e focuse s on condu cting  
testing  and quality assuranc e to ensure  reliabil ity and perfor mance of all components  of the 
University’ s technology  infrastruct ure. The Chang e Coordinator  will overse e the testing  functi on, 
develop  the test plan  and report  its findings  back to the CAB  for voting  on whether to advanc e the 
change to production.  
 
   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  e. IS Busines s Unit Manager  Review  and Approval : Following  the submission  of the new  RFC,  it will be 
screene d by the IS busines s unit manage r who  determi nes wheth er to author ize or deny the chan ge 
based on the information  in the RFC.  This screen ing proce ss inclu des a reality  check to ensure that  the 
RFC is appropriate,  and to ensure the reque st is complete.  The manage r can elect to approv e, deny or 
reque st additional  information  from  the chan ge initiator. The Change Initiator  is notified  of the 
progress of their  request at all stages. 
 
f. Scheduli ng and Notificatio ns: The Chang e Coordinat or establishes the appropriate  schedule  for the 
implementat ion of the change. The schedul e is base d on severa l factors  including  the change priority,  
other  changes being  implemented,  and syste m availability . Once the schedul e has been establishe d the 
Chang e Coordinator  ensure s the change is noted  on the consolidated  chang e schedule and notifies all 
interested  parties  of the pending  change.  
 
g. Chang e Impl ementation : The Chang e Implementer  implements  the chang e in accordanc e with  the 
implement ation plan and during the  schedule d time.  This is gener ally a technical  implementation.  
Failure of an implementati on at this leve l will normally require  the Chang e Impl ementer  to follow  the 
Roll-Back  plan  to ensure  normal  system  operations.  Significant  changes within  the envir onme nt that 
require a major  prog ram development  effort  will follow  the guideline s establishe d in the SDLC 
document  and establishe d Custome r Project  Managemen t procedur es. In genera l, these include the 
following  requirem ents whic h all change  implementati ons mus t follow:  
 
• Developing  an implementat ion project  plan  
• Verify  testing  was successful 
• Applying  the chang e to producti on 
• Validating  the chang e in producti on 
• Resolving  problems  caus ed by the change 
• Writing  a summary  of the results 
• Updating  ServiceNow  with  results  of the implementat ion 
 
h. Testing,  Validation,  and Acceptance : Once a chang e has been implemented,  the IS Business unit 
responsible  for the chang e and end users who  will be usin g the chang e will conduct  testing  following  
the test plan deve loped  during  the change  development  phase.  Accu rate documentation  and analysis 
of any abnormalities  is documented  in the chang e record.  
 
The Chang e Coordinat or or the CAB designe e will rate  the chang e with  one of the following  ratings.  
 
• Acceptanc e ⎯ with  no com ments  
 
• Acceptanc e ⎯ with  minor  exceptions  (note  that  thes e exceptions  will either  be fixed  under  the 
current change or may require  the creation of another  new change)  
 
• Rejection ⎯ normall y used only  if the implemented  change does not  meet  the requ ired business  
need s.  This results in a failed  chang e determ ination  and must be thoro ughly  revie wed to identify  
the root  caus e of the failure.  This will normall y result in the creati on of a new chang e request.  
 
i. Change  Revi ew and Accep tance : Following  a successful  chan ge implementat ion, a change revie w must 
be conduct ed to determ ine if the chang e resulted  in the desired  outcome.  In most cases, this review  
process might be very brief.  For a routi ne chang e, wher e the effect has been small and the results 
relatively  predictable,  the review  process  will be limited  to checkin g that  the chang e has provided  the 
user with  the desired  functionality.  
 
   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  j. Monitor  Change in Product ion Environm ent: To determin e whether the deployed  chang e has been 
effect ive, it is nece ssary  to monitor  the changes  in the production  environment.  For a small change, this 
may consist of checki ng on the desired functionality.  For larger  changes,  it might  require  the 
monitoring  of network  and server  information,  performance  data,  event  logs, or response times.   
 
k. Hold  Post -Implementation  Review : The Chang e Coordinat or is responsible  for ensuring that  a post-
implementati on review is completed  and presented  to the CAB. The findings  of the post 
implementation  review  are docum ented  within  ServiceNow . After  sufficient  information  has been 
gathered  from  monitoring  to determ ine the effecti veness of the change, a post-implementati on 
review is held during the next schedule CAB meeting.  
 
In addition  to making  a success  or failure  decisio n on the chang e implementat ion, the review  will also  
consider  how  the chang e was deployed,  and wheth er it was implemented  on time.  This  exercis e will 
result  in the document ation of lesson s learn ed from  the change.  Revie w feedback  is then  distrib uted to 
all parties  involved  in the change to encourage and enabl e future  process  improvements.  
 
l. Chan ge Advisory Board: The Change Adviso ry Board (CAB) is the change managemen t decision-making 
author ity for the IS organizati on.  The primar y responsibilitie s of the CAB are to: 
 
• Establish  and manage  overall change  managemen t polici es and provide  guidance  
• Review  and approve all pending  reques ts for high-risk and high -impac t change s 
• Review  comple ted changes and make  recommendation s for approval  
• Appoint people to key roles withi n the Change Managemen t program  
 
m. CAB Membe rship : The CAB is made up of indiv iduals  with stakeholde r interest in the IS productio n 
environment . Since RFCs can impact  any part of IS and any organi zational  group, the makeu p of the CAB 
refle cts the focu s of the particul ar RFC bein g review ed.  In general , the CAB is composed  of individuals  
who have a wide rang e of expertis e and are familia r with business requirements , the user commun ity, 
and IS system  technology.   
  
It is importan t to note that additiona l CAB mem bers may be required according to the RFCs being 
considere d and if necessary,  may includ e input from security, service s, vendor s and custome r user 
groups. The CAB Chairperson  will mak e thes e decis ions and notify  resources  if they need to atten d the 
regul arly schedule d CAB or an emer gency session. 
 
n. CAB Meetings : The CAB is schedule d to hold an exten sive meetin g monthly with upda te meet ings held 
on a weekl y basis or as required . The monthl y and weekl y meeting s will provid e an overall revie w of the 
technica l and business  impact, prioritizati on, approval,  and sched uling of pendin g RFCs . The monthl y 
meeting s will also includ e review of the key chang e managemen t reports, discussion on the chang e 
management  program,  and a review  of any failed changes  or changes requiring modifica tions  during 
the implementati on phase to ensure a successful change . A few days befor e each CAB meet ing, the CAB  
Chairperso n will send out a meeting notific ation and agenda  e-mail  to all CAB  members.  The contents  of 
this e-mail include:  
 
• Date, time,  and location (if relevan t) of the mee ting. 
 
• Forma t of the meetin g. As an altern ative to holding  face -to-face  mee tings, CAB  meetings  may be  
held using a confe rencing softwar e or by telephone conference calls.  
 
• The reviewin g orde r for RFCs (agenda) . CAB mem bers may  be interested in only a smal l number  of 
the propo sed change s and migh t join the meetin g only whe n necessary.  
 
   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  • A link to all the RFCs  being  reviewed  at the mee ting and a forwar d schedu le of the change  calendar 
for discussion. 
 
o. Voting Rules : This section establi shes the voting rules for RFCs requiring approval  of the CAB. The 
standa rd change  categories developed  and included  in the com pany’s  selected  technology  platform  
include  a recomm ended approva l process. If the specific change  being  comple ted does  not have  
established  approva l requirements , the CAB Manager  will assign a minimum  of two CAB  memb ers as the 
approval  auth orities for that change . These approval authoritie s are then added to the RFC 
docume ntation in the change record. 
 
7. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES: Role s associated  with  the Change  Management  proc ess are defined  in the 
context  of the management  function  and are not intended  to correspond  with  organizational  job titles.  
Specific  roles  have  been  defined  according  to industry  best  practice s.  In some  cases, many  persons  might  
share a single role;  and in other  cases, a single pers on may  assume many  roles.  The significant  roles defined  
for the change management  process  are: Change  Manager , Chang e Initiator , Change  Coordinator , Chang e 
Task Assignee or Chang e Implementer . 
 
Committees  are also defined  in terms  of the roles  they play and the responsib ilities  they  have in the context  
of the chang e managemen t functi on. At a mini mum, there  are normall y at least two committees  
establis hed: The Chang e Advisory  Boar d (CAB) and the Chang e Advisor y Boar d Emergenc y Committe e, whic h 
typically  have managemen t responsib ilities  for the chang e management  process. 
 
a. Change Manager : The Chang e Manage r is responsible  for managin g the activities  of the change 
managemen t proc ess for the IS organiz ation.  This individual  focuse s on the process more  than on any 
individual  change.  However,  the Chang e Manage r is involved  in ever y step  of the proc ess – from  receipt  
of an RFC to the implementati on of the chang e in the IS environm ent. The Change Mana ger is 
ultimate ly responsible  for the successful implementati on of any chang e to the IS environm ent. The 
Chang e Manager’s responsibilities  include:  
 
• Receiving  RFCs  and ensuring  that they  are properly  recorded  in ServiceNow . 
 
• Selecting  CAB members  and facilitating  CAB meetings . 
 
• Preparing CAB meeting  agendas  and providing  all necessar y review  information  to the CAB  
member s prior  to the meetin gs. 
 
• If necessa ry, assig ning teams  to conduct  RFC impact  analyses and risk assessments. 
 
• Analyzing  and prioriti zing RFCs.  
 
• Categorizing, assigning  change  Coordinators,  and scheduling  RFCs, subject to approv al by the CAB. 
 
• Approving  requests for minor chan ges or assigning  approval  authority  to othe rs. 
 
• Provi ding  change notification  to the Change Initiator  and other  affected  parties.  
 
• Monitoring  the succe ssful completion  of all RFCs, including  the chang e developme nt project  phases 
and ensuring  that  these  processes follow  the change schedule.  
 
• Reviewing  and evaluating  the change  process.  
   
 
 
Department of Information Services  
Last Updated: July 2020  b. Chang e Initiator : The Change  Initiator  (normally  someone  within  the IS Busines s Unit)  originates  changes  
by submitting  a Request for Change  (RFC) to ServiceNow . Everyone  is authorized  to initiate  an RFC.  The 
Change  Initiator  is responsible  for providing s ufficient  information  on the chang e that the Change 
Coordinator  can complete  the new chan ge form.  This person is notified  wheth er the chang e was 
approved  and is kept  up to date  on the status of the RFC throughout  the chang e proc ess. The Change  
Initiator  assists  the Change Manager and CAB in determining  the RFC priority  and,  at the conc lusion  of 
the change , participat es in the post-implement ation review. 
 
c. Change Coordinator : The Chang e Manage r assign s (with  the CAB’s  approval)  an individual  to be the 
Chang e Coordinator  for a change.  Chang e Coordinat ors will be assigne d to each IS busines s unit.  The 
Change  Coordinator  is responsible  for plannin g and coordinat ing all phases of the chang e from  
initiation  through  acce ptance and document ation.  The Chang e Coordinat or will document  all relevant  
infor mation in ServiceNow . 
 
The Chang e Coordinat or will routi nely provide project  status feedback  to the Chang e Manage r and 
identify  any problems  as they  arise . The Chang e Coordinator  presents all formal  updat es and prop osals 
to the CAB  after  the CAB  appr oves the RFC for passage through  the variou s chang e implementati on, 
review and closure phases.  
 
The Change Coordinat or must work  with  the Change Initiator  to ensure that the chan ge meet s the 
Chang e Initiator’s  requirements  and that  it success fully corrects  any prob lems or provides  the correct 
system enhan cement s intended  by the RFC. After  implement ing the change, the Change Coordinator  
assists  the Chang e Manage r in evaluatin g the chang e process as it applies to the change . The Change  
Coordinator  also coordinat es and presen ts the post -implement ation revie w analysis to the CAB. 
 
d. Chang e Task Assignee  or Change  Impl ementer : Change  Task  Assignees  are respons ible for execut ing 
individual  tasks within  a chang e and ensurin g they  are complet ed accordin g to the implement ation plan . 
For example , the techn ician who  performs  the actua l upgrade  of the operat ing system would  complete  
the tasks  associated  with  completing  the upgrade.  
 
The Change  Coordinator  when  developing  the plann ing and implementation  tasks  will assig n the 
appropriate  Change  Task Assignee  to perform  the tasks  required  to plan  and implement  the change.