Sample Acceptable Usage Policy  
 
This document should be tailored to your organisation’s specific requirements. 
Remove , add or substitute text where appropriate.  
 
This Acceptable Usage P olicy covers the security and use of all (Acme Corporation’s)  
informati on and IT equipment. It a lso includes the use of email, i nternet, voice and mobile IT 
equipment. This policy applies to all (Acme Corporation’s)  employees, contractors and 
agents  (hereafter referred to  as ‘individuals ’). 
 
This policy applies to all informa tion, in whatev er form, relating to (Acme Corporation’s ) 
business activities worldwide , and to all information handled by (Acme Corporation ) relating 
to other organisations with whom it deals. It also covers all IT and information 
communications facilities  operated by (Acme Corporation ) or on its behalf.  
 
 
Computer Access Control – Individual ’s Responsibility  
 
Access to the (Acme Corporation ) IT systems is controlled by the use of User  IDs, 
passwords and/or tokens. All User IDs and passwords are to be uniqu ely assigned to named 
individuals and consequently, individuals  are accountable for all actions on the (Acme 
Corporation ’s) IT systems.   
 
Individuals must not:  
 
• Allow anyone else to use their u ser ID/token and password on any (Acme Corporation ) 
IT system.  
• Leave their user accounts logged in at an unattended  and unlocked  computer.  
• Use someone else’s u ser ID and password to access (Acme Corporation’s) IT systems .   
• Leave their password unprotected (for example writing it down).  
• Perform any unauthorised chang es to (Acme Corporation’s) IT systems or information . 
• Attempt to access data that they are not authorised to use or access.  
• Exceed  the limits of their authorisation or specific business need to interrogate the 
system or data.  
• Connect any non -(Acme Corporat ion) authorised device to the (Acme Corporation ) 
network  or IT systems . 
• Store (Acme Corporation ) data on any non -authorised (Acme Corporation ) equipment . 
• Give or transfer (Acme Corporation ) data or software to any person or organisation . 
outside (Acme Corp oration ) without the authority of  (Acme Corporation) . 
 
Line m anagers must ensure that individuals  are given clear direction on the extent and limits 
of their authority with regard  to IT systems and data.  
 
 
Internet and email Conditions of Use  
 
Use of (Acme  Corporation ) internet and email is intended for business use. Personal use is 
permitted where such use does not affect the individual ’s business performance, is not 
detrimental to (Acme Corporation ) in any way, not in breach of any term and condition of 
employment and does not place the individual or (Acme Corporation)  in breach of statutory 
or other legal obligations.  
 
All individuals are accountable for their actions on the internet and email systems.  
 
 
Individuals must not:  
 
• Use the internet  or email  for the purposes of harassment or abuse.  
• Use profanity, obscenities, or derogatory remarks in communications.  
• Access, download, send or receive any dat a (including images), which (Acme 
Corporation ) considers offensive in any way, including sexually explicit,  discriminatory, 
defamatory or libel lous material.  
• Use the internet  or email  to make personal gains or conduct a personal business.  
• Use the internet  or email  to gamble.  
• Use the email  systems in a way that could affect its reliability or effectiveness, for 
example distributing chain le tters or spam . 
• Place any information on the Internet  that relates to (Acme Corporation ), alter any 
information about it, or express any opinion about (Acme Corporation ), unless they are 
specifically authorised to do this.  
• Send unprotected sensitive  or confidential  information externally.   
• Forward (Acme Corporation ) mail to personal (non -Acme Corporation ) email  accounts 
(for example a personal H otmail account).  
• Make official commitments through the internet  or email  on behalf o f (Acme Corporation ) 
unless authorised to do so . 
• Download copyrighted material such as music media (MP3) file s, film and video files (not 
an exhaustive list) without appropriate approval.  
• In any way infringe any copyright, database rights, trademarks or ot her intellectual 
property.  
• Download any software from the internet  without prior approval of the IT Department.  
• Connect (Acme Corporation) devices to the internet using non-standard connections . 
 
 
Clear Desk and Clear Screen Policy  
 
In order to reduce the  risk of unauthorised access or loss of information , (Acme Corporation ) 
enforces a clear desk and screen policy as follows:  
 
• Personal or confidential business information must be protected using security features 
provided for example secure print on print ers.   
• Computers must be logged off /locked  or protected with a screen locking mechanism 
controlled by a password when unattended.  
• Care must be taken to not  leave confidential  material on printers or photocopiers.  
• All busine ss-related printed matter  must b e disposed of using confidential waste bins or 
shredders.    
 
 
Working Off-site 
 
It is accepted that laptops and mobile d evices will be taken off -site. The following controls 
must be applied:  
 
• Working away from the office must be in line with (Acme Corpora tion) remot e working  
policy.  
• Equipment and media taken off -site must not be left unattended in public places and not 
left in sight in a car.  
• Laptops must be carried as hand luggage when travelling.  
• Information should be protected against loss or compromis e when working remotely ( for 
example at  home or in public places). Laptop  encryption must be used.  
• Particular care should be taken with the use of mobile devic es such as laptops, mobile 
phones, smartphones and t ablets . They must be protected at least by a password or a 
PIN a nd, where available,  encryption.  
 
 
Mobile Storage Devices  
 
Mobile  devices such as memory sticks, CDs, DVDs and removable hard drives must be 
used only in situations when network connectivity is unavailable or there is no other secure 
method of transferring data. Only (Acme Corporation ) authorised  mobile storage devices 
with encryption enabled must be use d, when transferring sensitive or confidential data.  
 
 
Software  
 
Employees must use only  software that is authorised by (Acme Corporati on) on (Acme 
Corporation ’s) computers. Authorised software must be used in accordance with the 
software supplier's licensing agreements. All software on (Acme Corporation ) computers 
must be approved and installed by the (Acme Corporation ) IT department.  
 
Individuals must not:  
 
• Store personal files such as  music, video, photographs or games on (Acme Corporation ) 
IT equipment.  
 
 
Viruses  
 
The IT department has implemented centralised, automated virus detection and virus 
software updates within the (Acme Corpor ation). All PCs have antiv irus software installed to 
detect and remove any virus automatically.  
 
 
Individuals must not:  
 
• Remove or disable anti -virus software.  
• Attempt to remove virus -infected files or clean up an infection, other than by the use of 
approv ed (Acme Corporation ) anti-virus software and procedures.  
 
 
Telephony ( Voice ) Equipment Conditions of Use  
 
Use of (Acme Corporation ) voice equipment  is intended for business use. Individuals  must 
not use (Acme Corporation ’s) voice facilities for sending or  receiving private communications 
on personal matters, except in exceptional circumstances. All non -urgent personal 
communications should be made at an individual’s own expense using alternative means of 
communications . 
 
 
Individuals must not:  
 
• Use (Acme Corporation ’s) voice for conducting private business.  
• Make hoax or threatening calls to internal or external destinations.  
• Accept reverse charge calls from domestic or International operators, unless it is for 
business use.  
 
 
Actions upon Termination of Con tract 
 
All (Acme Corporation ) equipment and data, for example laptops and mobile devices 
including telephones, smart phones, USB memory devices and CD s/DVDs , must be returned 
to (Acme Corporation ) at termination of contract.  
 
All (Acme Corporation ) data or  intellectual property developed or gained during the period of 
employment remains the property of (Acme Corporation ) and must not be retained beyond 
termination or reused for any other purpose.  
 
 
Monitoring and Filtering  
 
All data that is created and stor ed on (Acme Corporation)  computers is the property of 
(Acme Corporation ) and there is no official provision for individual data privacy , however 
wherever possible (Acme Corporation ) will avoid opening personal emails.  
 
IT system logging will take place wh ere appropriate, and investigations will be commenced 
where reasonable suspicion exists of a breach of this or a ny other policy. (Acme 
Corporation ) has the right (under certain conditions) to monitor activity on its systems, 
including internet  and email  use, in order to ensure systems security and effective operation, 
and to protect against misuse.  
 
Any monitoring will be carried out in accordance with audited, controlled internal processes, 
the UK Data Protection Act 1998, the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 and the 
Telecommunications (Lawful Business Practice Interception of Communications) 
Regulations 2000.  
 
This policy must be read in conjunction with:  
 
• Computer Misuse Act 1990  
• Data Protection Act  1998  
 
 
It is your responsibility to report suspected breaches of security policy without delay 
to your line management , the IT department , the information security department or 
the IT helpdesk .  
 
All breache s of i nformation security policies will be investigated. Where 
investigations reveal miscon duct, disciplinary action may follow in line with (Acme 
Corporation)  disciplinary procedures.