Security Logging and 
Monitoring Standard  
 
 
Version:  2.0 
 
Document ID:  3542  
 
 
 
Ontario Health  EHR Standard  – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  i  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright Notice  
Copyright © 2021, Ontario Health  
All rights reserved  
No part of this document may be reproduced in any form, including photocopying or transmission electronically to 
any computer, without prior written consent of Ontario Health . The information contained in this document is 
proprietary to Ontario Health  and may not be used or disclosed except as expressly authorized in writing by 
Ontario Health . 
Trademarks  
Other product names mentioned in this document may be trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective 
companies and are hereby ackn owledged.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   ii 
 Document Control  
Next Review Date:  Every two years  or otherwise established by the  Connecting Security Committee.  
Approval History  
APPROVER(S)  APPROVED DATE  
Connecting Security Committee  2017 -03-20 
Connecting Security Committee  2018 -03-26 
Connecting Security Committee  2021 -03-18 
Revision History  
VERSION 
NO. DATE  SUMMARY OF CHANGE  CHANGED BY  
1.1 2014 -10-09 Revised based on feedback from cGTA, cSWO, and eHealth 
Privacy. Aligned scope, enforcement and exemption 
sections to CPC policy. Clarified distinction between security 
and privacy policies (system vs. application), deleted 1.24 
related to retention as it was ambiguous and a duplicate of 
1.23.  Mark Carter  
1.2 2014 -10-17 Revised based on Oct 15th CSC Meeting. 1.23, created a 
reference to the IDP and CPC Retention policies. Updated 
Appendix A to note content required in IDP Services and 
Data Contribution Endpoints.  Mark Carter  
1.3 2014 -10-28 Revised based on feedback from cNEO and discussions with 
membership.  Mark Carter  
1.4 2014 -11-26 Revised based on Nov 26th CSC meeting. Update to 1.20 to 
require review of logs on a quarterly basis. References to 
specific retention periods removed and pointed to the CPC 
Retention Policy. Policy approved at the meeting.  Mark Carter  
1.5 2015 -01-21 Aligned name of access control policy based on final wave 3 
decision.  Mark Carter  
1.6 2015 -10-19 Updated policies to note the change in governance. The 
Steering Committee was replaced by the Applicable 
Oversight Body. The regional privacy and security 
committee has been removed from the exemption decision 
process.  Mark Carter  
1.7 2017 -03-20 Updated Standard to align with ITSM. The document title 
was changed from Policy to Standard. EHR Solution 
definition was updated. Revised controls based on feedback.  Raviteja Addepalli  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   iii 
 VERSION 
NO. DATE  SUMMARY OF CHANGE  CHANGED BY  
1.8 2018 -03-16 Updated standard to include Patient access to the EHR.  Geovanny  Diaz 
1.9 2020 -03-26 Updated standard to use new Ontario Health Template with 
minor control revisions.  Paul Cnudde  
2.0 2021 -01-21 Review of the document with minor changes, updated 
references and the review cycle to biennially.  Ana Fukushima  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   4 
 Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  
Purpose  
To define security logging and monitoring requirements for system level events and activities of [the EHR Solution] 
and HIC’s identity provider technology, data contribution endpoints and supporting infrastructure . 
Scope  
This standard applies to [the EHR Solution] Program and [the EHR Solution], including all Patient 
Portals/Applications for system level logging as defined in Appendix A: Sources and Contents of Logs.  
Health information cus todians (HICs) that use [the EHR Solution] to view, handle or otherwise deal with personal 
health information (PHI) by provisioning access through:  
 Local identity provider technology  (local IdP), this standard applies to:  
o The HIC’s local access control and identity management infrastructure (“identity provider 
services”) that manages the authentication and authorization used to provi de access to [the EHR 
Solution] (e.g., [the EHR Solution] Security Token Service Solution, M icrosoft Active Directory 
Federation Services 2.0, etc.)  
o Direct network connectivity to [the EHR Solution] Provider Portal and administrative 
functionality, including components in the connection path (firewalls, proxies, etc.)  
o The integration of [the EHR Solution] Provider Portal with the HIC’s local health information 
system (HIS) or electronic medical record (EMR) application(s)  
 Ontario Health’s ONE ID service , this standard applies to:  
o Direct network connectivity to [the EHR Solution] administrative fu nctionality, including 
components in the connection path (firewalls, proxies, etc.)  
In addition to the scope set out for viewing sites, for HICs that create or contribute PHI to [the EHR Solution] 
Clinical Data Repository (“contributing sites”), this stand ard also applies to:  
 The data contribution endpoints  that provide PHI to [the EHR Solution]’s Clinical Data Repository  
 The information technology and processes that ensure the quality of the data submitted (e.g. terminology 
mapping)  
Refer to the Connectin g Privacy Committee (CPC) Logging and Auditing policy when applying in logging, auditing 
and monitoring of all instances where:  
 All or part of the personal health information (PHI) in [the EHR Solution] is viewed, handled or otherwise 
deal t with ;  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   5 
  All or  part of the PHI in [the EHR Solution]] is transferred to a health information custodian (HIC);  
 All or part of the PHI in [the EHR Solution] is disclosed to and collected by a HIC as a result of an override 
of a Consent Directive; and  
 A Consent Directive  is made, modified or withdrawn in [the EHR Solution].  
This standard does not apply to any HIC, their agents or their Electronic Service Providers who do not view, create, 
contribute or have access to [the EHR Solution].  
 
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   6 
 Definitions  
Applicable Oversight Body:  The Applicable Oversight Body is comprised of senior -level executives who oversee all 
aspects of [the EHR Solution]. See Policy Governance Structure section within the Information Security Policy.  
Audit trail:  A chronological set of logs of  information system activities or the activities of a HIC, agent, or Electronic 
Service Provider. These logs can be used to reconstruct past events and track the activities that took place, and 
possibly detect and identify intruders.  
Auditing:  The practic e of inspecting logs for the purpose of:  
 Verifying activity performed on an information system or network by any agent or Electronic Service 
Provider of [the EHR Solution], or a HIC, their agents or Electronic Service Providers  
 Verifying that an informatio n system is in a desirable state  
 Answer ing questions about how an information system arrived at a particular state  
Data Contribution End Point(s) : Technology and related processes that provide data to the Clinical Data Repository 
or are queried to provide data to a Clinical Viewer. Typically, these systems are the Information System (e.g. 
Hospital Information System, Laboratory Information System, Clinical Information System, HL7 Interface Engines, 
etc.) that directly connects to [the EHR Solution] to provide clinical data.  
[The EHR Solution] : [The EHR Solution] and supporting systems designed to store and make available specified 
electronic PHI fr om the electronic health information systems of HICs.  
[The EHR Solution] includes Patient Portals/Applications (HIC or non -HIC affiliated) that facilitate Patient access to 
the EHR. These applications may be:  
 Provider -Gated (Provider facilitates communicat ion with Patient)  
 Direct -to-Patients (Patient has direct access to EHR)  
 Patient -Gated (Patient delegates access to a Substitute Decision Maker/additional delegates (i.e. family 
member, physician)  
[The EHR Solution] Program:  Also known as the Program Office ; consists of Agents and Electronic Service 
Providers who support [the EHR Solution] including privacy and security -related activities, initiatives and 
processes.  
Electronic Service Provider:  A person or entity that provides goods or services for the purpo se of enabling a HIC to 
use electronic means to collect, use, modify, disclose, retain or dispose of PHI, and includes a health information 
network provider.  
Identity Provider Services:  Technology and related supporting services, policies, processes, and procedures that 
are used to create, maintain, secure, validate, assert and manage electronic identities to [the EHR Solution].   
Information System:  A discrete set of information technology organized for the collection, processing, 
maintenance, use, disclo sure, destruction, or disposal of information.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   7 
 Information Technology:  Any asset (physical or logical) that is used in the automatic acquisition, storage, 
manipulation, management, movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission, or recept ion of data 
or information. It includes, but is not limited to, hardware, software, firmware, ancillary equipment, and related 
resources.  
Log:  A record of the events occurring within [the EHR Solution] or a HIC’s information systems and networks.  
Logging:  The process of recording a pre -defined set of HIC, agent or Electronic Service Provider or information 
system or network activities.  The automated logging processes serve as the basis for establishing audit trails for 
activities and events on an informat ion system.  
May:  The requirement is only a recommendation, or provided as an implementation example and is not intended 
on being exhaustive.  
Monitoring:  The process of observing, supervising, or controlling information system or network activities on a 
continuous basis.  
Shall/Must:  Used for absolute requirements, i.e., they are not optional.  
Should:  Used when valid reasons exist in certain circumstances not to implement the requirement; however, the 
implementer must understand the implications before choosi ng a different course and must consider 
implementing compensating controls.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   8 
 Standard  Requirements   
1. Requirements for Health Information Custodians  
1.1. HICs must log all HIC, agent, and Electronic Service Provider participation in the [the EHR Solution], 
and mus t log system events/activities on their local identity provider technology and data 
contribution endpoints. See Appendix A, Sources of Contents of Logs.  
1.2. HICs should classify and protect logs in accordance with the highest level of information contained 
within the data contributor endpoint and identity provider service logs.  
Log Generation  
1.3. HICs must log all activities of administrators and operators on their identity provider services and 
their data contribution endpoints as part of the general audit trail process.  
1.4. HICs must ensure that data contributor and identity provider services system logs, at a minimum and 
where relevant, contain the following information for each event/activity, consult the Identity 
Provider Standard for more specific logging require ments of the Identity Provider Service functions 
(e.g. registration, authentication):  
1.4.1.  Identifiers (as many as available) for the subject requesting the action (e.g., user ID, 
computer name, IP address, and MAC address).  
1.4.2.  Identifiers (as many as available) f or the object the action was performed on (e.g., file names 
accessed, unique identifiers of records accessed in a database, IP address, and MAC 
address).  
1.4.3.  Date and time.  
1.4.4.  The event activity (e.g., sign -on and sign -off).  
1.4.5.  Status of the security event activity  (e.g., success or failure, denied or allowed).  
1.4.6.  Type of access (e.g., read, write, execute).  
1.4.7.  Alarms raised by access control and network monitoring systems.  
1.5. HICs must not filter their data contribution endpoint and identity provider service logs at the s ource.  
1.6. HICs must synchronize their system clocks on their identity provider technology and data contribution 
endpoints to a centralized clock source. HICs must perform clock synchronization validation, at a 
minimum, daily to ensure on -going clock synchron ization accuracy.  
Protection of Logs  
1.7. HICs must implement controls to protect the confidentiality and integrity of all local identity provider 
technology and data contribution endpoints logs both in storage and during transmission.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   9 
 1.8. HICs must secure all ac cess to local identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints 
logs.  
1.9. HICs should maintain a list of all agents or Electronic Service Providers who have authorized access to 
identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs. The  list should contain:  
1.9.1.  Full name of the agent or Electronic Service Provider.  
1.9.2.  ID that the agent or Electronic Service Provider uses to logically access the log.  
1.9.3.  Name/type of log to which the agent or Electronic Service Provider has access.  
1.10. HICs should not  configure local identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs to 
overwrite old data when the maximum log size limit has been reached.  
1.11. HICs must prohibit their agents and Electronic Service Providers with authorized access to local 
iden tity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs from erasing or deactivating logs of 
their own activities.  
1.12. HICs must ensure that the management of their identity provider technology and data contribution 
endpoints log generation sources is l ogged and controlled via documented change control policies 
and procedures.  
Monitoring and Log Analysis  
1.13. HICs should implement automated mechanisms on their local identity provider technology and data 
contribution endpoints to consolidate logs to centralize d log management servers.  
1.14. HICs should implement automated tools on their respective information systems to convert local 
identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs with different content and formats 
to a single standard format with c onsistent data field representations.  
1.15. HICs should monitor their local identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs to 
ensure that:  
1.15.1.  Log triggers are appropriately configured.  
1.15.2.  Log triggers are not compromised.  
1.15.3.  Faults are identified for further analysis and remediation steps  
1.15.4.  Identified faults are resolved or mitigated.  
1.16. HICs must be able to correlate their logs from their local identity provider technology and data 
contribution endpoints to assist in the detection and prevention of informa tion and information 
system misuse or intrusion.  
1.17. HICs should implement automated correlation tools to look for patterns of events/activities across 
their local identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   10 
 1.18. HICs should review their iden tity provider technology and data contribution endpoints logs, at a 
minimum, monthly.  
1.19. HICs should ensure that the logs of administrators and operators who support their local identity 
provider technology and data contribution endpoints are reviewed, at a minimum, quarterly.  
1.20. Segregation of duties should exist for identity provider technology and data contribution endpoints 
log reviews, e.g., someone other than the administrator should review the logs for the systems 
he/she manages.  
Log Retention and Storage  
1.21. HICs should ensure that their logs relating to the data contribution endpoints and identity provider 
services are readily available online, at a minimum for the duration indicated in the Federation 
Identity Provider Standard and CPC Retention Policy. Logs  must be available to facilitate 
investigations in a timely manner in accordance with the standard.   
1.22. HICs must retain archived identity provider services and data contribution endpoints system logs for a 
minimum duration indicated in the Federation Identi ty Provider Standard and CPC Retention Policy 
whether the service is performed by the HIC, an agent or Electronic Service Provider.   
1.23. HICs must archive their data contributor endpoint and identity provider service logs in a format that 
can be restored for as long as the data retention is required.  
1.24. HICs should label and store their data contributor and identity provider services archive logs in an 
organized manner for easy retrieval.  
2. Requirements  for [the EHR Solution]  
2.1. The EHR Solution] Program must log all information system events/activities on the [EHR Solution] 
found in Appendix A: Sources and Contents of Logs performed by Patients, HICs, Agent, and 
Electronic Service Provider with access to [the EHR Solution].  
2.2. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that  their logging capabilities are enabled and operational at 
all times. [The EHR Solution] Program must configure their information systems in a manner such that 
they are disabled if logging is not operational.  
2.3. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that al l logs are classified in accordance with the highest 
level of information contained within the logs.  
Log Generation  
2.4. [The EHR Solution] Program must log all activities of their information system administrators and 
information system operators as part of the general audit trail process.  
2.5. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that all logs, at a minimum and where relevant, contain the 
following information for each event/activity:  
2.5.1.  Identifiers (as many as available) for the subject requesting the action (e.g., user ID, 
computer name, IP address, and MAC address).  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   11 
 2.5.2.  Identifiers (as many as available) for the object the action was performed on  (e.g., file 
names accessed, unique identifiers of records accessed in a database, IP address, and MAC 
address).  
2.5.3.  Date  and time.  
2.5.4.  The event activity (e.g., sign -on and sign -off).  
2.5.5.  Status of the security event activity (e.g., success or failure, denied or allowed).  
2.5.6.  Type of access (e.g., read, write, execute).  
2.5.7.  Alarms raised by access control and network monitoring systems.   
2.6. [The EHR Solution] Program must not filter logs at the source.  
2.7. [The EHR Solution] Program must synchronize their information system clocks to a centralized clock 
source. [The EHR Solution] Program must perform clock synchronization validation, at a mini mum, 
daily to ensure on -going clock synchronization accuracy.  
Protection of Logs  
2.8. [The EHR Solution] Program must implement controls to protect the confidentiality and integrity of 
logs both in storage and during transmission.  
2.9. [The EHR Solution] Program m ust restrict all access to logs based on the principles of least privileged 
and need -to-know.  
2.10. [The EHR Solution] Program must maintain a list of all agents or Electronic Service Providers who have 
authorized access to logs. At a minimum, the list must con tain:  
2.10.1.  Full name of the agent or Electronic Service Provider.  
2.10.2.  Work phone number of the agent or Electronic Service Provider.  
2.10.3.  Work email address of the agent or Electronic Service Provider.  
2.10.4.  ID that the agent or Electronic Service Provider uses to logically access the log.  
2.10.5.  Name/type of log to which the agent or Electronic Service Provider has access.  
2.11. [The EHR Solution] Program must not configure logs to overwrite old data when the maximum log 
size limit has been reached.  
2.12. [The EHR Solution] Program must prohi bit their agents and Electronic Service Providers with 
authorized access to logs from erasing or deactivating logs of their own activities.  
2.13. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that the management of log generation sources is logged 
and controlled via d ocumented change control procedures.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   12 
 Monitoring and Log Analysis  
2.14. [The EHR Solution] Program should implement automated mechanisms on their information systems 
to consolidate logs to centralized log management servers.  
2.15. [The EHR Solution] Program should impl ement automated tools on their information systems to 
convert logs with different content and formats to a single standard format with consistent data field 
representations.  
2.16. [The EHR Solution] Program must monitor their logs to ensure that:  
2.16.1.  Log triggers a re appropriately configured.  
2.16.2.  Log triggers are not compromised.  
2.16.3.  Faults are identified for further analysis and remediation steps.  
2.16.4.  Identified faults are resolved or mitigated.  
2.17. [The EHR Solution] Program should implement automated analysis tools on their information systems 
to assist in the detection and prevention of information and information system misuse or intrusion.  
2.18. [The EHR Solution] Program should implement automated correlation tools on their information 
systems to look for patterns of events/act ivities across multiple information systems.  
2.19. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that automated alerts are triggered for unsuccessful 
authentication attempts.  
2.20. [The EHR Solution] Program must review their logs, at a minimum, monthly to detect anomalous 
events on the network or [The EHR Solution] agent or Electronic Service Provider behavior that is 
outside of standard or procedures, or to identify automated alerts generated that may indicate 
attacks or break -ins.  
2.21. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure th at information system administrator and operator logs are 
reviewed, at a minimum, monthly.  
2.22. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that segregation of duties must exist for all log reviews, e.g., 
someone other than the information system administrator must review the logs for the information 
system he/she manages.  
Log Retention and Storage  
2.23. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that their logs relating to production data are readily 
available online, at a minimum, for six months.  
2.24. [The EHR Solution] Program must retain archived information system logs for a minimum duration as 
highlighted in the CPC Retention Policy.  
2.25. [The EHR Solution] Program must retain archived logs of Patient, HIC, Agent, and Electronic Service 
Provider activities in accordance with [the  EHR Solution] Retention Policy.  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   13 
 2.26. [The EHR Solution] Program must ensure that logs related to backups are readily available online for 
the same period as logs related to production data.  
2.27. [The EHR Solution] Program must archive their logs in a format that c an be restored for as long as the 
data retention is required.  
2.28. [The EHR Solution] Program should label and store their archive logs in an organized manner for easy 
retrieval.  
2.29. Upon retention expiry, [the EHR Solution] Program must ensure that their logs are disposed of in 
accordance with the requirements defined in Information and Asset Management Standard.  
Exemption s Any exemptions to this Standard must be approved by the Applicable Oversight Body, who will 
authorize exemptions only where there is clear just ification to do so and only to the minimum 
extent necessary to meet the justified need.  
See Appendix A: Information Security Exemption Requests in the Information Security Policy.  
Enforcement  All instances of non -compliance will be reviewed by the Applicab le Oversight Body.  
The Applicable Oversight Body has the authority to impose appropriate penalties, up to and 
including termination of the Agreements with the HIC, Electronic Service Provider or termination 
of the access privileges of agents, and to require the implementation of remedial actions . 
 
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   14 
 References  
Legislative  
 PHIPA, ss. 12, 13 and Part V.1  
 O. Reg. 329/04, s. 6  
International Standards  
 ISO/IEC 27001:2013, Information Technology – Security Techniques – Information Security Management 
Systems – Requirements   
 ISO/IEC 27002:2013, Information Technology – Security Techniques – Code  of Practice for Information 
Security Management   
 ISO/IEC 27005: 2018 Information Technology – Security Techniques – Information Security Risk 
Management  
 ISO 27799:2016 Health Informatics – Information security management in health using ISO/IEC 27002  
Ontario Health EHR Policy Documents  
 Information Security Policy  
 Acceptable Use of Information and In formation Technology Standard  
 Access Control and Identity Management Standard for System Level Access  
 Local Registration Authority Procedures Standard  
 Identity Federation Standard  
 Business Continuity Standard  
 Cryptography Standard  
 Electronic Service Providers Standard  
 Information Security Incident Management Standard  
 Information and Asset Management Standard  
 Network and Operations Standard  
 Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  
 Systems Development Lifecycle Standard  
 Physical Security Standard  
 Threat  Risk Management Standard   
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   15 
 Appendix A: Sources and Contents of Logs  
System/Software  Event/Activity to be Recorded  
Anti -malware software  
(such as anti -virus, anti -spyware 
and root kit detectors)   Instances of detected malware  
 File and information system disinfection attempts  
 File quarantines  
 Malware scans  
 Signature or software updates  
Intrusion detection and intrusion 
prevention systems   Suspicious behavio ur  
 Detected attacks  
 Actions performed to stop malicious activity  
Remote access and wireless 
access systems   Login attempts  
 Amount of data sent and received during session  
Web proxies and content filters   URLs accessed  
 URLs blocked  
 Files Transferred  
Vulnerability Management 
Software  
(includes patch management and 
vulnerability assessment 
software)   Patch installation history  
 Vulnerability status  
 Known vulnerabilities  
 Missing software updates  
Authentication Servers  
(includes directory servers and 
single sign -on servers)   Authentication attempts  
Routers and switches   Blocked Activity  
Firewalls   Detailed logs  of network activity  
Network Access Control   Status of host security checks  
 Quarantined hosts and reason  
Identity Provider Services   Reference the Log Generation section of this Security Logging and 
Monitoring standard and the Federation Identity Provider Standard.  
Data Contribution End Points   Reference the Log Generation section of this Security Logging and 
Monitoring standard.  
Operating System  
(such as those for servers, 
workstations and networking 
devices (e.g., routers, switches))   System Events  
o System  shut down  
o Service starting   Security Events  
o File accesses  
o Policy changes  
o Account changes  
 
 
Ontario  Health  EHR Standard – Security Logging and Monitoring Standard   16 
 System/Software  Event/Activity to be Recorded  
Applications  
(e.g., e -mail servers and clients, 
Web servers and browsers, file 
servers and file sharing clients, 
database servers etc.)  
 
* Note – Refer to the CPC Logging 
and Auditing Policy for 
requirements for Application 
(PHI) level logging and auditing 
requirements.   Client requests and server 
response  
 Authentication attempts  
 Account changes  
 Use of privileges  
 Number and size of 
transactions  
 Operational events  
o Startup and shutdown   Configuration changes  
 Application -specific events such as:  
o Email sends and receipts  
o File access  
o Service request  
o System level transactions  
o Function performed (such as 
read, write, modify, delete)  
Mobile Application Logs   Mobile application input/output validation failures  
 Authentication successes and failures  
 Authorization (access control) failures; session management failures  
 Use of higher -risk functionality (e.g. insecure network connections; 
application errors and system event s; legal and other opt -ins)