Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  1  
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  
From  the Office of the Chief Information Officer,  State of Minnesota  
Version:  1.8 
Effective Date:  1/1/ 2016  
Revis ed:  12 /31/202 4 
Approved:       John Israel, State Chief Information Security Officer  Date: 3/20/2025 
Standard Statement   
Detective and preventive information security monitoring controls must be in place to support the 
confidentiality, availability , and integrity of State data and systems.   
Employees must abide by the terms of this standard. Employees who violate this standard  may be subject to 
discipline, up to and including discharge.  
Table 1. Security Logging and Monitoring Controls  
Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
1 Logging  Implement automated logging on all systems to reconstruct 
the following events:  
• All actions taken by accounts with root or 
administrative privileges.  (All system administrator 
commands while logged on as system administrator)  
• Access to all log data.  
• All log -in attempts  (successful and unsuccessful) . 
• All system log offs.  
• Use of and changes to identification and 
authentication mechanisms —including but not limited 
to creation , modification, enabling, disabling, and 
removal of accounts and modifications of privileges —
and all changes, additions,  or deletions to accounts 
with root or administrative privileges.  Low 
Moderate  
High 

Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  2 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
• Initialization, stopping or pausing of the logs.  
• Creation and deletion of system -level objects.  
• Setting/modifying logs and logging behavior. 
• Setting/modifying firewall rules.  
• Setting/modifying system configurations and 
parameters.  
• All password  changes.  
• Switching accounts or running privileged actions from 
another account, (e.g., Linux/Unix SU or Windows 
RUNAS) . 
• Creation or modification of super-user groups . 
• Subset of security administrator commands while 
logged on in the security administrator role . 
• Subset of system administrator commands while 
logged on in the user role . 
• Clearing of the audit log file  
• Use of identification and authentication mechanisms 
(e.g., user ID and password)  
• Change of file or user permissions or privileges (e.g., 
use of suid/guid, chown, su)  
• Remote access outside of the corporate network 
communication channels (e.g., modems, dedicated 
VPN) and all dial- in access to the system  
• Changes made to an application or database by a 
batch file  
• Application -critical record changes  
• Changes to database or application records, where the 
application has been bypassed to produce the change 
(via a file or other database utility)  
• All system and data interactions concerning FTI  
• System and application a lerts and error messages . 
• System and application shutdown and restart.  
• Security policy modifications . 
• Printing sensitive information. 
• Packet -screening denials orig inating from untrusted 
networks.  
• Packet -screening denials or iginating from trusted 
networks.  
• Modification of proxy services.  
• Wireless activity . 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  3 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
2 Logging 
Individual User 
Access  Log all individual user access to data with a data protection 
categorization of High.  High 
3 Content of Log 
Records  Logged events must contain the following information:  
• User identification. 
• Type of event.  
• Timestamp  using internal system clocks  that can be 
mapped to Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) or 
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).  
• Success or failure indication.  
• Identity or name of affected data, file, system 
component or resource.  
• Program or command used to initiate the event. 
• Source and destination addresses.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
4 Performance 
Monitoring  Systems must be monitored for system resource utilization 
and overall system availability to ensure the system meets 
business availability and performance requirements.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
5 Security System  
Failure  Immediately report failures of critical security control systems 
to security and system support personnel, including failures 
of: 
• Firewalls  
• IDS/IPS  
• FIM  
• Anti-virus  
• Physical access controls  
• Logical access controls  
• Logging mechanisms  
• Segmentation controls (if used)  Low 
Moderate  
High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  4 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
6 Security System 
Failure 
Response  Respond to failures of any critical security controls in a timely 
manner. Processes for responding to failures in security 
controls must include:  
• Restoring security functions  
• Identifying and documenting the duration (date and 
time start to end) of the security failure  
• Identifying and documenting cause(s) of failure, 
including root cause, and documenting remediation 
required to address root cause  
• Identifying and addressing any security issues that 
arose during the failure  
• Performing a risk assessment to determine whether 
further actions are required because of  the security 
failure  
• Implementing controls to prevent cause of failure 
from reoccurring  
• Resuming monitoring of security controls  Low 
Moderate  
High 
7 Log Review  Review the following using automated methods, where 
technically possible, at least daily:  
• All security events.  
• Logs of all systems that store, process, or transmit 
data with a data protection categorization of High.  
• Logs of all critical system components  
• Logs of all systems that perform security functions 
including but not limited to firewalls, intrusion 
detection systems/intrusion prevention systems , and 
authentication servers.  
Review logs of all other system components periodically based 
on risk.  
Correlate logs across different repositories to gain enterprise -
wide situational awareness.  
Perform manual reviews of system logs randomly on demand 
but at least once every thirty (30) days.  
Exceptions and anomalies identified during the review process 
must be investigated and security events addressed following 
the information security incident m anagement process.  High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  5 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
8 Clock 
Synchronization  Synchronize all system clocks at least hourly to a designated 
internal time source that is accurate to the approved industry -
accepted authoritative time source.  Time data must be 
protected from unauthorized modification.  
External primary and secondary time servers used must be 
selected from  the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) Internet time service. The secondary server 
is selected from a different geographic region than the 
primary server.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
9 Protection of 
Logs  Logs must be secured by:  
• Limiting access to those with a job -related need.  
• Protecting log files from unauthorized modification  or 
deletion . 
• Requiring log configuration changes to be approved by 
authorized security personnel.  
• Only allowing defined personnel or roles  to set or 
change  which events are to be logged  by specific  
systems. Low 
Moderate  
High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  6 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
10 Centralized Log 
Management 
Service  An authorized central log server must be in place that:  
• Collects/receives log data from systems that store, 
process,  or transmit data with a data protection 
categorization of High.  
• Collects/receives log data from systems/software that 
perform security functions including but not limited to 
firewalls, intrusion detection systems/intrusion 
prevention systems, authentication servers , and anti -
malware software.  
• Collects/receives log data in as near real time as is 
appropriate for the log source.  
• Provides log reduction and normalization.  
• Does not alter the original content or time ordering of 
the log data.  
• Ensures the confidentiality, integrity,  and availability 
of stored logs.  
• Monitors the availability of log sources.  
• Alerts authorized security personnel of inappropriate 
or unusual activities.  
• Compiles audit records into a system -wide, time-
correlated audit trail.  
• Alerts authorized security personnel when allocated 
log storage volume is nearing maximum storage 
capacity.  High 
11 Retention of 
Logs  Retain log data for at least one year, with a minimum of three 
months immediately available for analysis.  
Log data for Federal Tax Information (FTI) must be retained for 
seven years.  
Log data for MARS- E related systems must be retained for at 
least 10 years.  
Sufficient storage capacity must be allocated to ensure log 
data is maintained for the duration of the retention period.  
The system must alert incident response personnel within 24 
hours of log storage volume reaching 80 percent of the 
repository’s maximum audit record storage capacity.  High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  7 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
12 Change 
Detection  Centrally managed change detection mechanisms (for 
example, file integrity monitoring) must be in place to detect 
and alert on unauthorized changes to:  
• Critical system files.  
• Configuration files.  
• Critical application files.  
• Security log files. 
Change detection  mechanisms  must be configured to perform 
critical file comparisons at least daily  events must be 
immediately forwarded to an authorized central log server.  High 
13 Configuration 
Checking  Centrally managed configuration checking must be in place to 
detect and report on system compliance to security 
configuration baselines.  High 
14 Network 
Intrusion 
Detection and 
Prevention  Centrally managed network intrusion detection and/or 
prevention must be in place to:  
• Monitor network traffic between different zones of 
control and between the internet and internal 
network.  Intrusion detection agents must be  deployed 
on the wireless side of the firewall. 
• Monitor inbound and outbound connections for 
unusual or unauthorized activity or conditions.  
• Perform daily system integrity checks of firewalls and 
other network access control systems.  
• Network intrusion events must be continuously 
forwarded to an authorized central log server.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  8 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
15 Host Intrusion 
Detection and 
Prevention  Host intrusion detection/prevention software must be in place 
on systems that store, process, or transmit Federal Tax 
Information (FTI), where technically possible, to monitor for 
attack attempts and potential compromises. This software 
must:  
• Be actively running.  
• Prevent users from disabling or altering the software.  
• Generate event logs and continuously forward to an 
authorized central log management service. 
• Alert authorized personnel when indications of 
compromise or potential compromise occur including:  
• Unauthorized expo rt of information.  
• Signaling to an external information system . 
• Potential intrusions.  
• Be centrally managed.  High 
16 Wireless 
Intrusion 
Detection  Centrally managed wireless intrusion detection must be in 
place to identify unauthorized wireless devices and to detect 
attack attempts and potential compromises to the wireless 
network.  
Wireless network intrusion events must be continuously 
forwarded to an authorized central log server.  
Where wireless intrusion detection coverage is not in place 
other processes must be implemented to detect unauthorized 
wireless access points on a quarterly basis.  
Incident response procedures must be implemented in the 
event unauthorized wireless access points are detected.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  9 Control 
Number  Control Name  Control Detail  Applicable 
Data 
Protection 
Categorization  
17 Anti-Malware 
Software  Anti-malware software capable of detecting, removing,  and 
protecting against all known types of malicious software and 
malicious functions within other suspicious files on all systems 
commonly affected by malicious software and at critical points 
throughout the network. This software must:  
• Be actively running.  
• Prevent users from disabling or altering the software.  
• Generate event logs and continuously forward to an 
authorized central log server. 
• Automatically check for and install updates at least 
daily. 
• Perform desktop and critical system file scans as the 
files are downloaded, opened, or executed. Either 
block or quarantine malicious code and send an alert 
to the administrator in response to malicious code 
detection.  
• Be capable of addressing the receipt of false positives.  
• Be centrally managed.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
18 Anti-Malware 
Review  For systems not commonly affected by malicious software, 
perform evaluations at least annually to identify and evaluate 
evolving malware threats to confirm whether such systems do 
not require anti -malware software.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
19 Inspect Media  Inspect all  media containing diagnostic and test programs for 
malicious code before the media are used in the information 
system. Low 
Moderate  
High 
20 Spam Protection  Centrally managed spam protection mechanisms must be in 
place at system entry and exit points to detect and act  on 
unsolicited messages.  
Update spam protection mechanisms when new releases are 
available following normal change processes.  Low 
Moderate  
High 
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  10 Reason for the Standard  
Security monitoring and log management reduces the likelihood that malicious activity would go unnoticed and 
affect the confidentiality, availability , or integrity of State data and systems.  
Roles & Responsibilities  
• Employees , Vendors,  and Contractors  
o Be aware of and follow relevant information security policies, standards,  and procedures.  
o Ensure information security is incorporated into processes and procedures.  
o Ensure vendors and contractors are following required information security controls.  
o Contact information security staff or email GRC@state.mn.us with questions about the 
information security policies, standards,  or procedures.  
• Supervisors and Managers  
o Ensure employees and contractors are proficient in the information security policies, standards 
and procedures that are relevant to their role.  
o Hold employees accountable for following the information security policies, standards,  and 
procedures.  
• Information Technology Personnel  
o Apply appropriate controls to the design, operation and maintenance of systems, processes, and 
procedures in conformance with the information security policies, standards,  and procedures.  
• Information Security Personnel 
o Develop, maintain,  and assess compliance with the information security policies, standards,  and 
procedures.  
o Develop, maintain,  and implement a comprehensive information security program.  
o Provide training on information security policies, standards,  and procedures.  
o Assist agencies and personnel with understanding and implementing information security policies, standards,  and procedures.  
• Agency Data Practices Personnel  
o Assist agencies and personnel with questions on proper data use, collection, storage, destruction,  and disclosure.  
Applicability  
This standard applies to all departments, agencies, offices, councils, boards, commissions, and other entities in 
the executive branch of Minnesota State Government.  
Related Information  
Security Monitoring and Response Policy  
State Standards and Authoritative Source Cross Mapping   
Security Logging and Monitoring Standard  11 Glossary of Information Security Terms  
History  
Table 2. Version History  
Version  Description Date  
1.0 Initial Release  7/8/15  
1.1 Added Compliance Enforcement Date  12/29/2015  
1.2 Updated Compliance Enforcement Date and Template  12/20/2016  
1.3 Updated Compliance Enforcement Date and Template  10/26/2016  
1.4 New document title and updates for clarification and to include MARS -E 
requirements  3/10/2020 
1.5 Fixed formatting errors  and updated required antimalware scanning 11/1/2021 
1.6 Scheduled document refresh  10/1/2022 
1.7 Updated version number and revision date  10/1/2023 
1.8 Added enforcement language; updated version and revision date  12/2/2024 
Contact   
GRC@state.mn.us