CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 1  
              
 
ACCESS CONTROL  
Quick link to Access Control summary table  
AC-1 ACCESS CONTROL POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. An access control policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
stand ards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the implementation of the access control policy and the associated 
access controls;  
b. Reviews and updates the current:  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the  
access control policy and procedures;  
c. Review and update the current access control:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the access  control procedures implement the a ccess control policy and controls; 
and 
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the access control 
policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected security  the controls and control enhancements in the AC Markup Version of Special Publication 800 -53 Revison 5, Initial Public Draft  
This document reflects  significant changes  to the controls, c ontrol enhancements, and  
supplemental guidance  between SP 800 -53, Revision 4 and the Initial Public Draft of SP 800-
53, Revision 5.   T he changes to the control baselines are  reflected  in a separate document.  
The following changes are not tracked in this document:  
• Formatting, structural, an d editorial cha nges;   
• Updates to related controls and references for each control;  
• Removal of the “Priority Code” and “Baseline Allocation” for each control ; and  
• Addition of “Quick Links .” 
Note that many of the privacy controls are based on controls in the Privacy Appendix (Appendix 
J) of SP 800 -53, Revision 4, but are dispayed as “new” in this document.  For additional 
information and traceability of the privacy controls, please see Appendix F, Consolidated View 
of Privacy Controls.  
 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 2 family. Policy and procedures reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, 
regulations, policies, standards, and guidance The risk management strategy is an important factor 
in establishing policy and procedures . Comprehensive policy and guidance. procedures help 
provide security and privacy assurance.  Security  and privacy program policies and procedures at 
the organization level may make the need for system -specific p olicies and procedures 
unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the general security and privacy policy for 
organizations  or conversely, or can be represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex 
nature of certain organizations. The proced ures can be established for security program in 
general and privacy programs  and for particular information systems, if needed.  Procedures 
describe how policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that 
is the object of th e procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans 
or in one or more separate documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not 
constitute an organizational policy or procedure.  The organizational risk management strategy is a 
key factor in establishing policy and procedures.  
Related Controls :  IA-1, PM-9, PM-25, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100; NIST Interagency 
Report 7874 . 
AC-2 ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT  
Control :   
a. Identif iesDefine  and selects docume nt the types of system accounts allowed for use within the 
system in  support of organizational missions and business functions : [Assignment: 
organization- defined  information system  account types ];; 
b. Assign account managers for system accounts;  
c. Establish  conditions for group and role membership;  
d. Specify  authorized users of the system , group and role membership, and access authorizations 
(i.e., privileges ) and other attributes (as required) for each account ; 
e. Requir e approvals by [Assignment: organization -defin ed personnel or roles ] for requests to 
create system accounts;  
f. Create, enable, modif y, disabl e, and remov e system accounts  in accordance with [ Assignment: 
organization- defined policy, procedures , and conditions ]; 
g. Monitor  the use of system accounts;  
h. Notif y account managers  within [ Assignment: organization- defined time-period for each 
situation ]: 
1. When accounts are no longer required;  
2. When users are terminated or transferred; and  
3. When individual system usage or need -to-know changes  for an individual ; 
i. Authorize  access to the system based on:  
1. A valid access authorization;  
2. Intended system usage; and  
3. Other attributes as required by the organization or associated missions  and business 
functions;  
j. Review accounts  for compliance with account management requirements  [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency ]; 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 3 k. Establish a process for reissuing  shared/group account credentials (if deployed) when 
individuals are  removed from the group ; and  
l. Align account management processes with personnel termination and transfer processes . 
Supplemental Guidance :  System account types include, for example, individual, shared, group, 
system, guest , anonymous, emergency, developer/manufacturer/vendor, temporary , and service. 
Some of the account management requirements listed above can be implemented by organizational 
information systems. The identification of authorized users of the system and the specification of 
access privileges reflects  the requirements in other security controls in the security plan. Users 
requiring administrative privil eges on system accounts receive additional scrutiny by appropriate 
organizational personnel  responsible for approving such a ccounts and privileged access, including, 
for example,  system owner, mission/business owner, or chief information security officer . 
Organization s may choose to define access privileges or other attributes by account, by type of 
account, or a combination of both. O ther attributes required for authorizing access include, for 
example, restrictions on time -of-day, day -of-week, and point -of-origin. In defining other account 
attributes, organizations consider system -related requirements (e.g., scheduled maintenance, 
system upgrades)  and mission/business requirements , (e.g., time zone differences, customer 
requirements, remote access to s uppor t travel requirements ).. Failure to consider these factors 
could affect system availability . 
Temporary and emergency accounts are intended for short -term use. Organizations establish 
temporary accounts  as a part of normal account activation procedures when  there is a need for 
short -term account s without  the demand for immediacy in account activation. Organizations 
establish e mergency accounts in response to crisis situation s and with the need for rapid account 
activation . Therefore, emergency account activation may bypass normal account authorization 
processes. Emergency and temporary accounts are not to be confused with infrequently used 
accounts  including, for example, local logon  account s used for special tasks defined by 
organizations or when network res ources are unavailable.  Such accounts remain available and are 
not subject to automatic disabling or removal  dates. Conditions for disabling or deactivating 
accounts include, for example,  when shared/group, emergency, or temporary accounts are no 
longer re quired; or when individuals are transferred or terminated. Some types of system accounts 
may require specialized training .  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -5, AC -6, AC -17, AC-18, AC-20, AC-24, AU-9, CM-5, IA -2, IA -8, 
MA-3, MA -5, PE-2, PL -4, PS -2, PS -4, PS -5, PS-7, SC -7, SC-13, SC -37. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED SYSTEM AC COUNT MANAGEMENT  
Employ automated mechanisms  to support the management of system accounts.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The use of automated mechanisms can include, for examp le, using 
email or text messaging to automatically notify account managers when users are terminated 
or transferred; using the system to monitor account usage; and using telephonic notification to 
report atypical system account usage.  
Related Controls :  None. 
(2) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | REMOVAL OF TEMPORAR Y AND EMERGENCY ACCOUNTS  
Automatically [ Selection: remove; disable]  temporary and emergency accounts after [ Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period for each type of account ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement requires the removal or disabling of both 
temporary and emergency accounts automatically after a predefined time -period has elapsed, 
rather than at the convenience of the systems administrator . Automatic removal or disabling 
of accounts pr ovides a more consistent implementation . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE INACTIVE ACCOUNTS   
Automatically disable accounts after when the accounts:   
(a) Have expired;  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 4 (b) Are no longer associated to a user;  
(c) Are in violation of organizational p olicy;  
(d) Are no longer used by applications, services, or the system; and  
(a)(e)  Have been inactive for  [Assignment: organization -defined time -period] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | AUTOMATED AUDIT ACT IONS 
Automatically  audit account creation, modification, enabling, disabling, and removal  actions,  and 
notif y [Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AU -2, AU- 12. 
(5) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | INACTIVITY LOGOUT  
Require that users log out when [ Assignment: organization -defined time -period of expected 
inactivity or description of when to log out ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is behavior/policy -based and requires users 
to take physical action to log out when they are expecting inactivity longer than the defined 
period.  
Related Controls :  AC -11. 
(6) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC PRIVILEGE M ANAGEMENT  
Implement the following dynamic privilege management capabilities: [ Assignment: organization -
defined list of dynamic privilege management capabilities] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  In contrast to conventional access control approaches which employ 
static system accounts and predefined user privileges, dynamic access control approaches 
(e.g., service- oriented architectur es) rely on run time access control decisions facilitated by  
dynamic privilege management  such as attribute based access control (ABAC).  While user 
identities remain relatively constant over time, user privileges  typically  change  more 
frequently based on ongoing mission or business requirements and operational needs of 
organization s. Dynamic privilege management can include, for example, immediate 
revocation of privileges fr om users, as opposed to requiring that users terminate and restart 
their session s to reflect any change s in privilege s. Dynamic privilege management can also 
include those  mechanisms that change  user privileges based on dynamic  rules as opposed to 
editing specific user  profil es. Examples include  automatic adjustment s of user privilege s if 
they are operating out of their normal work time s, their job function or assignment changes,  or 
if system s are under duress or in emergency maintenance situation s. This control 
enhancement also include s the ancillary effects of privilege changes, for exam ple, the changes 
to encryption keys used for communication s. Dynamic privilege management can support 
requirements for information system resiliency . 
Related Controls :  AC -16. 
(7) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | ROLE -BASED SCHEMES  
(a) Establish and administer privileged user  accounts in accordance with a role- based access 
scheme that organizes allowed system access and privileges into roles;  
(b) Monitor privileged role assignments ; and 
(c) Takes  [Assignment: organization- defined actio ns] Revoke access when privileged role 
assignments are no longer appropriate.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Privileged roles are organization -defined roles assigned to individuals 
that allow those individuals to perform certain security- relevant functions that ordinary users 
are not authorized to perform . These  privileged roles include, for example, key management, 
account management, network and system administration, database administration, and web 
administration.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DYNAMIC ACCOUNT CREATION MANAGEMENT  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 5 Create, activat e, manage, and deactivate [Assignment: organization- defined system accounts] 
dynamically . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Approaches for dynamically creating , activating, managing, and 
deactivating system or service/application  accounts (e.g., as implemented withi n service-
oriented architecture s) rely on establishing automatically provisioning the accounts 
(identities)  at run time for entities that were previously unknown. Organizations plan for the 
dynamic creation , activation, management, and deactivation  of these accounts by establish ing 
trust relationships , business rules,  and mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate 
related authorizations and privileges . 
Related Controls :  AC -16. 
(9) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | RESTRICTIONS ON USE  OF SHARED  AND GROUP ACCOUNTS  
Only permit  the use of shared  and group accounts that meet  [Assignment: organization- defined 
conditions for establishing shared and group accounts].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Before permitting the use of shared or group accounts, organizations 
consider the in creased risk due to the lack of accountability with such accounts.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(10) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | SHARED  AND GROUP ACCOUNT CREDENTIAL TERMINATION CHANGE  
The information system terminates Change  shared  and group account  credentials when  members  
leave the group.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is intended to ensure that former group 
members do not retain access to the shared/group account.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(11) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | USAGE CONDITIONS  
Enforce  [Assignment: organiz ation -defined circumstances and/or usage conditions] for 
[Assignment: organization- defined system accounts].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement helps to enforce the principle of least 
privilege, increase user accountability, and enable more e ffective account monitoring. Such 
monitoring includes, for example, alerts generated if the account is used outside of specified 
parameters. Organizations can describe the specific conditions or circumstances under which 
system accounts can be used, for ex ample, by restricting usage to certain days of the week, 
time of day, or specific durations of time.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(12) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | ACCOUNT MONITORING FOR  ATYPICAL USAGE  
(a) Monitor system accounts  for [Assignment: organization- defined atypical usage] ; and  
(b) Report atypical usage of system accounts to  [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or 
roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Atypical usage includes, for example, accessing systems at certain 
times of the day and from locations that are not consistent with the normal usage patterns of 
individuals working in organizations.  Account monitoring may inadvertently create privacy 
risks. Data collected to identify atypical usage may reveal previously unknown information 
about the behavior of individuals . Organizations assess and document these risks in their 
privacy impact assessment and make determinations that are in alignment with their privacy 
program plan . 
Related Controls :  AU -6, AU- 7, CA -7, IR -8, SI -4. 
(13) ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT | DISABLE ACCOUNTS FO R HIGH -RISK INDIVIDUALS  
Disable accounts of users posing a significant risk within [ Assignment: organization -defined time -
period] of discovery of the risk.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Users posing a significant risk to organizations include individuals for 
whom relia ble evidence or intelligence indicates either the intention to use authorized access 
to systems to cause harm or through whom adversaries will cause harm. Such harm includes 
the potential adverse impacts to organizational operations and assets, individuals , other 
organizations, or the Nation. Close coordination and cooperation among authorizing officials, 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 6 system administrators, and human resource managers is essential for timely execution of this 
control enhancement.  
Related Controls :  AU -6, SI -4. 
(14) ACCOUNT M ANAGEMENT | PROHIBIT SPECIFIC ACCOUNT TYPES  
Prohibit the creation and use of [ Selection  (one or more) : shared; guest; anonymous; temporary; 
emergency]  accounts for access to  [Assignment: organization -defined information types ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  NIST  Special Publication s 800-162, 800-178. 
Related Controls :  PS-4. 
(15) ACCOUNT MANAG EMENT | ATTRIBUTE -BASED SCHEMES  
(a) Establish and administer privileged user accounts in accordance with an  attribute -based 
access scheme that specifies  allowed system access and privileges based on attributes ; 
(b) Monitor privileged attribute -based  assignments ;  
(c) Monitor changes to attributes; and  
(d) Revoke access when privileged attribute- based assignments are no longer appropriate.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Privileged roles are organization -defined roles assigned to individuals 
that allow those individuals to perform certain security- relevant functions that ordinary users 
are not authorized to perform . These privileged roles include, for example, key management, 
account management, network and system administration, database administration, and web 
administration.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-162, 800-178. 
AC-3 ACCESS ENFORCEMENT  
Control :  Enforce approved authorizations for logical access to information and  system  resources  in 
accordance with applicable access control polic ies. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Access control policies  (e.g., identity -based policies , role-based policies , 
control matrices, cryptography)  control access between active entities or subjects ( i.e., users or 
processes acting on behalf of users) and passive entities or objects ( i.e., devices, files, records, 
domains) in organizational  system s. In addition to enforcing authorized access at the system level  
and recognizing that systems can host many applications and services in support of organizational 
missions and business operations , access enforcement mechanisms can  also be employed at the 
application  and service level  to provide increased information security.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -4, AC -5, AC -6, AC -16, AC -17, AC -18, AC -19, AC -20, AC -21, AC -
22, AC-24, AC -25, AU-9, CA-9, CM-5, CM -11, IA-2, IA -5, IA -6, IA -7, IA -11, MA-3, MA -4, 
MA-5 MP-4, PM-25, PS-3, SC -2, SC -3, SC -4, SC -13, SC -28, SC -31, SC -34, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | RESTRICTED ACCESS T O PRIVILEGED FUNCTIONS   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -6]. 
(2) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DUAL AUTHORIZATION  
Enforce dual authorization  for [Assignment: organization- defined privileged commands  and/or 
other organization- defined actions].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Dual authorization may also be known as two -person control. Dual 
authorization mechanisms require the approval of two authorized i ndividuals to execute. 
Organization s do not require  dual authorization mechanisms when immediate responses  are 
necessary to ensure public and environmental safety.   
Related Controls :  CP-9, MP -6. 
(3) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | MANDATORY ACCESS CO NTROL  
Enforce [ Assig nment: organization- defined mandatory  access control policy ] over all subjects and 
objects where the policy:  
(a) Is uniformly enforced ac ross all subjects and objects within the boundary of the  system ;  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 7 (b) Specifies that a subject that has been granted access to information is constrained from doing 
any of the following ; 
(1) Passing  the information to unauthorized subjects or objects;  
(2) Granting  its privileges to other subjects;  
(3) Changing one or more security attributes on subjects, objects, the system , or system 
components;  
(4) Choosing the security attributes and attribute values to be associated with newly created 
or modified objects; or  
(5) Changing the rules governing access control;  and 
(c) Specifies that [ Assignment: organization- defined subjects] may explicitly be granted 
[Assignment: organization- defined  privileges (i.e., they are trusted subjects) ]] such that they 
are not limited by any of the above constraints.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Mandatory access co ntrol as defined in this control enhancement is  
synonymous with is a t ype of  nondiscretionary access  control , and is not constrained only to 
certain historical uses  (e.g., implementations using the Bell- LaPadula Model) .. The ab ove 
class of  mandatory access control policies constrain s what actions subjects can take with 
infor mation obtained from data objects for which they ha ve already been granted access. This 
prevents  the subjects from passing the information to unauthorized subjects and objects. This 
class of mandatory access control policies also constrains what actions su bjects can take with 
respect to the propagation of access control privileges; that is, a subject with a privilege 
cannot pass that privilege to other subjects. The policy is uniformly enforced ove r all subjects 
and objects to which the system has control. Otherwise,  the access control policy can be 
circumvented. This  enforcement typically is provided by an implementation that mee ts the 
reference monitor concept  as described in AC -25. The policy is bounded by the system 
boundary (i.e., once the information i s passed outside of the control of the system , additional 
means may be required to ensure that the constraints on the informat ion remain in effect).  
The trusted sub jects described above are granted privileges consistent with the  concept of 
least privilege (see AC -6). Trusted subjects are only given the minimum privileges relative to 
the above policy necessary  for satisfying organizational mission /business  needs. The control 
is most applicable when there is a policy mandate (e.g., law, Executive Order, directive, or 
regulation) that establishes a policy  regarding access to  sensitive/ controlled unclassified 
information or  classified information and some users of the system are not authorized access 
to all such information  resident in the system . This control c an operate in conjunction with 
AC-3(4). A  subject constrained in its operation by policies governed by this control is still 
able to operate under the less rigorous constraints of AC -3(4), but policies governed by this 
control take precedence over the less  rigorous constraints of AC -3(4). For example, while a 
mandatory access control policy  imposes  a constraint preventing a subject from passing 
information to another subject operating at  a different sensitivity label, AC -3(4) permits  the 
subject to pass the  information to any subject with the same sensitivity label as th e subject.  
Related Controls :  SC-7. 
(4) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | DISCRETIONARY ACCES S CONTROL   
Enforce [Assignment : organization- defined discretionary access control policy ] over defined 
subjects and  objects where  the policy specifies that a subject that has been g ranted access to 
information can  do one or more of the following : 
(a) Pass the information to any other subjects or objects;  
(b) Grant  its privileges to other subjects;  
(c) Change  security attributes o n subjects, objects, the system, or the system’s components;  
(d) Choose  the security attributes to be associated with newly created or revised objects; or  
(e) Change  the rules governing access control . 
Supplemental Guidance :  When discretionary access control poli cies are implemented , subjects 
are not constrained regarding what actions they can take with information for which they have 
already been granted access. Thus , subjects that have been granted access to information are 
not prevented from passing (i.e., the subjects  have the discretion to pass) the information to 
other subjects or objects . This control enhancement can operat e in conjunction with AC -3(3). 
A subject that is constrained in its operation by p olicies governed by AC -3(3) is still able to 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 8 operate un der the less rigo rous constraints of this control enhancement . Therefore, while AC -
3(3) impose s constraints  preventing a subject from passing information to another subject 
operating at a different sensitivity level, AC -3(4) permits  the subject to pass the information 
to any subject at the same sensitivity level.  The policy is bounded by the system boundary. 
Once  the information is passed outside of the control of the system , additional means may be 
required to  help ensure that the  constraints remain in eff ect. While the older, more traditional 
definitions of discretionary access control require identity -based access control, that limitation 
is not required for this use of discretionary access control.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | SECURITY -RELEVANT INFORMATION   
Prevent access to [ Assignment: organization -defined security- relevant information ] except during 
secure, non -operable system states.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Security -relevant information is any information within system s that 
can poten tially impact the operation of security functions or the provision of security services 
in a manner that could result in failure to enforce system security polic ies or mainta in the 
isolation of code and data. Security -relevant information includes, for exa mple, f iltering  rules 
for routers /firewalls, cryptographic key management information, configuration parameters 
for security services, and access control lists . Secure, non -operable system states include the 
times  in which system s are not performing missio n/business -related processing, for example, 
the system is off -line for maintenance, troubleshooting, boot -up, or shut down . 
Related Controls :  CM -6, SC -39. 
(6) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | PROTECTION OF USER AND SYSTEM INFORMATI ON  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -4 and SC -28]. 
(7) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ROLE -BASED ACCESS CONTROL  
Enforce a role -based  access control policy  over defined subjects and objects and control access 
based upon [ Assignment: organization- defined roles and users authorized to assume such roles].  
Supplem ental Guidance :  Role -based access control (RBAC) is an access control policy that 
restricts system access to authorized users. Organizations can create specific roles based on 
job functions and the authorizations (i.e., privileges) to perform needed opera tions on the 
systems associated with the organization -defined roles. When users are assigned to the 
organizational roles, they inherit the authorizations or privileges defined for those roles. RBAC simplifies privilege administration for organizations beca use privileges are not 
assigned directly to every user (which can be a significant number of individuals for mid-  to 
large -size organizations) but are instead acquired through role assignments. RBAC can be 
implemented either as a mandatory or discretionary  form of access control. For organizations 
implementing RBAC with mandatory access controls, the requirements in AC -3(3) define the 
scope of the subjects and objects covered by the policy.  
Related Controls :  PE-2. 
(8) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | REVOCATION OF ACCES S AUTHORIZATIONS   
Enforce the revocation of  access authorizations resulting from changes to the security attributes 
of subjects and objects based on [ Assignment: organization -defined rules governing the timing of 
revocation s of access authorizations].  
Supple mental Guidance :  Revocation of access rules may differ based on the types of access 
revoked. For example, if  a subject  (i.e., user or process) is removed from a group, access may 
not be revoked until the next time the object (e.g., file) is opened or the next time the subject  
attempts a new access  to the object . Revocation based on changes to security labels may take 
effect  immediately. Organizations can provide alternative approaches  on how to make 
revocation s immediate if  system s cannot provide such capa bility and immediate revocation is 
necessary . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(9) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | CONTROLLED RELEASE   
Release inf ormation outside of the established system  boundary unlessonly if : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 9 (a) The receiving [ Assignment: organization -defined  system or system component ] provides 
[Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] ; and  
(b) [Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] are used to validate the 
appropriateness of the information designated for release.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Systems can on ly protect organizational information within the 
confines of established system  boundaries. Additional security safeguards controls  may be 
needed to ensure that such information is adequately protected once it i s passed beyond the 
established system boundar ies. Examples of information l eaving the system boundary include 
transmitting information to an external information system or printing the information on one 
of its printers.  In cases situations  where  the system is unabl e to determine the adequacy of the 
protection s provided by entities outsid e its boundary, as a mitigating control, organization s 
determine procedurally whether the external  systems are providing adequate security. The 
means used to determine the adequacy of security provided by external syst ems include, for 
example,  conducting inspection s or periodic testing  and assessments;  establishing agreement s 
between the organization and its counterpart organizations ; or some other  process. The means 
used by external entities to protect the information received need not be the same as th ose 
used by the organization, but  the mea ns employed are sufficient to provide consistent 
adjudication of the security policy to protect the information.  
This control enhancement require s systems to employ technical or pr ocedural means to 
validate the inform ation prior to releasing it to external systems. For example, if the system 
passes information to another  system controlled by another  organization , technical means are 
employed to validate that the security attributes associated with th e exported information are 
appropriate for the receiving system. Alternatively,  if the system passes information to a 
printer in organization -controlled space, procedural means can be employed to ensure that 
only appropriately authorized individuals gain access to the printer. This control enhancement  
is most applicable when there is some policy mandate that establishes policy regarding access 
to the information, and that policy applies beyond the realm of a particular system or 
organizati on. 
Related Controls :  SC-16. 
(10) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | AUDITED OVERRIDE OF  ACCESS CONTROL MECHANISMS   
Employ an audited override of automated access control mechanisms under [ Assignment: 
organization- defined conditions ] by [Assignment: organization- defined rol es].  
Supplemental Guidance :  In certain situations, for example, where there is a threat to human life 
or an event that threatens the organization’s ability carry out critical missions or business 
functions, an override capability for access control mechanisms may be needed . Such override 
conditions are defined by organizations and are used only in those limited circumstances.  
Related Controls :  AU -2, AU- 6, AU -10, AU -12, AU -14. 
(11) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | RESTRICT ACCESS TO SPECIFIC INFORMATION   
Restrict direct access to data repositories containing [ Assignment: organization -defined 
information types ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is intended to provide flexibility regarding  
access control of specific pieces of information within a system. For example, role -based 
access could be employed to allow access to only a specific  type of personally identifiable 
information within a database rather than allowing access to the database in its entirety.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(12) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ASSERT AND ENFORCE APPLICAT ION ACCESS  
(a) Require applications to assert, as part of the installation process, the access needed to the 
following system applications and functions: [ Assignment: organization -defined system 
applications and functions ]; and  
(b) Provide an enforcement mechanism to prevent other -than -asserted access.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is intended to address applications that need 
to access existing system applications and functions including, for example, user contacts; 
global positioning system; camera; keyboard; microphone; network; or phones or other files.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 10 Related Controls :  CM -7. 
(13) ACCESS ENFORCEMENT | ATTRIBUTE -BASED  ACCESS CONTROL  
Enforce attribute -based access control  policy  over defined subjects and objects and control 
access based upon [ Assignment: organization -defined attributes to assume access permissions].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Attribute -based access control (ABAC) is an access control policy that 
restricts system access to authorized users based on their organizatio nal attributes, such as job 
function; environmental attributes, such as time of day; and resource attributes, such as the 
classification of a document. Organizations can create specific rules based on attributes and 
the authorizations (i.e., privileges) to  perform needed operations on the systems associated 
with the organization -defined attributes and rules. When users are assigned to attributes 
defined in ABAC policies or rules, they can be provisioned to a system with appropriate 
privileges or dynamically  granted access to a protected resource upon access. ABAC can be 
implemented either as a mandatory or discretionary form of access control. For organizations 
implementing ABAC with mandatory access controls, the requirements in AC -3(3) define the 
scope of the subjects and objects covered by the policy.  
Related Controls :  PE-2. 
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-3, 800-162; NIST Interagency 
Report 7874 . 
AC-4 INFORMATION FLOW ENFORCEMENT  
Control :  Enforce approved authorizations for controlling the flow of information within the syst em 
and betwee n interconnected systems based on [ Assignment: organization- defined information flow 
control policies ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information flow control regulates where information is allowed to can 
travel within a system and between systems (as opposed to who is allowed to access the 
information) and without explicit regard to subsequent accesses to that information.  Flow control 
restrictions include, for example, keeping export -controlled information from being transmitted in 
the clear to the Internet, blo cking outside traffic that claims to be from within the organization, 
restricting web requests to the Internet that are not from the internal web proxy server, and 
limiting information transfers between organizations based on data structures and content. 
Transferring information between systems representing in different security domains with different 
security policies introduces risk that such transfers violate one or more domain security policies. 
In such situations , information owners  or stewards provide guidance  at designated policy 
enforcement point s between interconnected systems. Organization s consider  mandating specific 
architectural solutio ns when required to enforce specific security policies.  Enforcement  include s, 
for example,  prohibiting informati on transfers between interconnected systems  (i.e., allowing 
access only) ; employing hardware  mechanisms to enforce one- way information flows; and 
implementing trustworthy regrading mechanisms to reassign security attributes and security labels.  
Organizatio ns commonly employ information flow control policies and enforcement mechanisms 
to control the flow of information between designated sources and destinations (e.g., networks, 
individuals, and devices) within systems and between interconnected systems. Flo w control is 
based on the characteristics of the information and/or the information path. Enforcement occurs, for example, in boundary protection devices (e.g., gateways, routers, guards, encrypted tunnels, 
firewalls) that employ rule sets or establish con figuration settings that restrict system services, 
provide a packet -filtering capability  based on header information, or message -filtering capability 
based on message content  (e.g., implementing  key word searches or using document 
characteristics) .. Organi zations also consider the trustworthiness of filtering/inspection 
mechanisms (i.e., hardware, firmware, and software components) that are critical to information flow enforcement. Control enhancements 3 through 22 primarily address cross -domain solution 
needs which focus on more advanced filtering techniques, in -depth analysis, and stronger flow 
enforcement mechanisms implemented in cross -domain products, for example, high- assurance 
guards. Such capabilities are generally not available in commercial off -the-shelf information 
technology products.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 11 Related Controls :  AC -3, AC -6, AC -16, AC -17, AC -19, AC -21, AU -10, CA -9, CM -7, PM-25, SC-4, 
SC-7, SC -16, SC -31. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | OBJECT SECURITY ATT RIBUTES   
Use [ Assignment: organiz ation -defined security attributes] associated with [ Assignment: 
organization- defined information, source, and destination objects ] to enforce [Assignment: 
organization- defined information flow control policies ] as a basis for flow control decisions.  
Supple mental Guidance :  Information flow enforcement mechanisms compare security attributes 
associated with information (data content and data structure) and source/destination objects, 
and respond appropriately (e.g., block, quarantine, alert administrator) when the mechanisms 
encounter information flows not explicitly allowed by information flow policies. For example, 
an in formation object labeled Secret  would be allowed to flow to a d estination object labeled 
Secret , but an inform ation object labeled Top Secret  would not be allowed to flow to a 
destination object labeled S ecret . Security attributes can also include, for example, source and 
destination addresses employed in traffic filter firewalls. Flow enforcement using explicit 
security attributes can be used , for example, to control the release of certain types of 
information.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | PROCESSING DOMAINS   
Use protected processing domains to enforce [ Assignment: organization -defined information flow 
control polici es] as a basis for flow control decisions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Within systems, protected processing domains are processing spaces 
that have controlled interactions wit h other processing spaces, enabling control of information 
flows between these spaces  and to/from data/information objects. A protected processing 
domain can be provided, for example, by implementing domain and type enforcement. In 
domain and type enforcement, system processes are assigned to domains; information is 
identified by types; an d information flows are controlled based on allowed information 
accesses (determined by domain and type), allowed signaling among domains, and allowed process transitions to other domains.  
Related Controls :  SC-39. 
(3) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | DYNAMIC IN FORMATION FLOW CONTR OL  
Enforce dynamic information flow control based on [ Assignment: organization -defined policies].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational policies regarding dynamic information flow control 
include, for example, allowing or disallowing information flows based on changing conditions or mission/operational considerations. Changing conditions include, for example, changes in 
organizational risk tolerance due to changes in the immediacy of mission/business needs, 
changes in the threat enviro nment, and detection of potentially harmful  or adverse events.  
Related Controls :  SI-4. 
(4) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT  | CONTENT CHECK | FLOW CONTROL OF  ENCRYPTED INFORMATI ON  
Prevent encrypted information  from bypassing content -checking [Assignment: organiza tion-
defined flow control  mechanisms] by [ Selection (one or more): decrypting the information; 
blocking the flow of the encrypted information; terminating communications sessions attempting 
to pass encrypted information; [Assignment: organization- defined p rocedure or method]].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Content checking, security policy filters, and data type identifiers are 
examples of flow control mechanisms.  
Related Controls :  SI-4. 
(5) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | EMBEDDED DATA TYPES   
Enforce [ Assignment: or ganization- defined limitations ] on embedding data types within other data 
types.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Embedding data types within other data types may result in reduced 
flow control effectiveness. Data type embedding includes, for example, inserting executable 
files as objects within word processing files, inserting references or descriptive information 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 12 into a media file, and compressed or archived data types that may include multiple embedded 
data types.  Limitations on data  type embedding consider the l evels of embedding and prohibit 
levels of data type embedding that are beyond the capability of the inspection tools . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | METADATA  
Enforce information flow control based on [ Assignment: organization -defin ed metadata].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Metadata is information used to describe the characteristics of data. 
Metadata can include structural metadata describing data structures (e.g., data format, syntax, 
and semantics) or descriptive metadata describing data contents  (e.g., age, location, telephone 
number ).. Enforcing allowed information flows based on metadata enables simpler and more 
effective flow control. Organizations consider the trustworthiness of metadata regarding data 
accuracy (i.e., knowledge tha t the metadata values are correct with respect to the data),  data 
integrity (i.e., protecting against unauthorized changes to metadata tags) , and the binding of 
metadata to the data payload (i.e., ensuring sufficiently strong binding techniques with 
appropriate levels of assurance).  
Related Controls :  AC -16, SI -7. 
(7) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | ONE-WAY FLOW MECHANISMS   
Enforce [ Assignment: organization- defined one -way information flows ] using hardware 
mechanisms.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(8) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | SECURITY POLICY FIL TERS  
Enforce information flow control using [ Assignment: organization- defined security policy filters] as 
a basis for flow control decisions for [ Assignment: organization -defined information flow s]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization -defined security policy filters can address data structures 
and content. For example, security policy filters for data structures can check for maximum file lengths, maximum field sizes, and data/file types (for str uctured and unstructured data). 
Security policy filters for data content can check for specific words (e.g., dirty/clean word 
filters), enumerated values or data value ranges , and hidden content. Structured data permits 
the interpretation of data content b y applicatio ns. Unstructured data typically refers to digital 
information  without a  particular  data structure or with a data structure that does not facilitate 
the development of rule sets to address the particular sensitivity  of the information conveye d 
by the data or the associated flow enforcement decisions. Unstructured data consists of bitmap 
objects that are inherently non-language -based (i.e., image, video, or audio files); and textual 
objects that are based on written or printed languages  (e.g., com mercial off -the-shelf word 
processing documents, spreadsheets, or emails). . Organizations can implement more than one 
security policy filter to meet information flow control objectives  (e.g., employing clean word 
lists in conjunction with dirty word lists  may help to reduce false positives ).. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(9) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | HUMAN REVIEWS   
Enforce the use of human reviews for [ Assignment: organization -defined information flows ] under 
the following conditions: [ Assignment: organization -defined conditions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations define security policy filters for all situations  where 
automated flow control decisions are possible. When a fully automated flow control decision is not possible, then a human review may be empl oyed in lieu of, or as a complement  to, 
automated security policy filtering . Human review s may also be empl oyed as deemed 
necessary by organization s. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(10) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | ENABLE AND DISABLE SECURITY PO LICY FILTERS   
Provid e the capability for privileged administrators to enable and disable [ Assignment: 
organization- defined security policy filters]  under the following conditions: [ Assignment: 
organization- defined conditions ]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 13 Supplemental Guidance :  For example, as allowed b y the system authorization, administrators 
can enable security policy filters to accommodate approved data types.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(11) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | CONFIGURATION OF SE CURITY POLICY FILTER S  
Provide the capability for privileged admini strators to configure [ Assignment: organization- defined 
security policy filters] to support different security policies.  
Supplemental Guidance :  For example, to reflect changes in security policies, administrators can 
change the list of “dirty words” that security policy mechanisms check in accordance with the 
definitions provided by organizations.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(12) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | DATA TYPE IDENTIFIERS   
When transferring information between different security domains,  use [Assignment:  organization-
defined data type identifiers] to validate data essential for information flow decisions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Data type identifiers include, for example, filenames, file types, file 
signatures/tokens, and multiple internal file signatures /tokens.  System s may allow transfer of 
data only if compliant with data type format specification s. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(13) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | DECOMPOSITION INTO POLICY -RELEVANT SUBCOMPONEN TS  
When transferring information between different se curity domains,  decompose information into 
[Assignment: organization- defined policy -relevant subcomponents] for submission to policy 
enforcement mechanisms . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Policy enforcement mechanisms apply filtering, inspection, and/or 
sanitizat ion rules to the policy -relevant subcomponents of information to facilitate flow 
enforcement prior to transferring such information to different security domains. Parsing transfer files facilitates policy decisions on source, destination, certificates, cla ssification, 
attachments, and other security -related component differentiators.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(14) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | SECURITY POLICY FIL TER CONSTRAINTS   
When transferring information between different security domains,  implement [ Assignm ent: 
organization- defined security policy filters] requiring fully enumerated formats that restrict data 
structure and content . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Data structure and content restrictions reduce the range of potential 
malicious or unsanctioned content in cross -domain transactions. Security policy filters that 
restrict data structures include, for example, restricting file sizes and field lengths. Data content policy filters include, for example, encoding formats for character sets  (e.g., Universal 
Chara cter Set Transformation Formats, American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange) ; restricting character data fields to only contain alpha -numeric characters; 
prohibiting special characters; and validating schema structures . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(15) INFORMATION FLOW ENFORC EMENT | DETECTION OF UNSANCTIONED INFORMATION  
When transferring information between different security domains,  examine the information for the 
presence of  [Assignment: organized- defined unsanctioned information] and prohibit the transf er of 
such information in accordance with the [ Assignment: organization- defined security policy].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Detection of unsanctioned information includes, for example, checking 
all information to be transferred for malicious code and dirty w ords.  
Related Controls :  SI-3. 
(16) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | INFORMATION TRANSFE RS ON INTERCONNECTED SYSTEMS   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -4]. 
(17) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | DOMAIN AUTHENTICATI ON  
Uniquely identif y and authenticate source and destinat ion points by [ Selection (one or more): 
organization, system, application, service, individual ] for information transfer . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 14 Supplemental Guidance :  Attribution is a critical component of a security concept of operations. 
The ability to identify source and de stination points for information flowing in systems, 
allows the forensic reconstruction of events when required, and encourages policy compliance 
by attributing policy violations to specific organizations/individuals. Successful domain 
authentication requi res that system labels distinguish among systems, organizations, and 
individuals involved in preparing, sending, receiving, or disseminating information.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, IA -3, IA -9. 
(18) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | SECURITY ATTRIBUTE BINDING   
The in formation system  binds security attributes to information using [ Assignment: organization -
defined binding techniques ] to facilitate information flow policy enforcement.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Binding techniques implemented by information systems affect th e 
strength of security attribute binding to information. [Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -16]. 
(19)  Binding strength and the assurance associated with binding techniques play an important part 
in the trust organizations have in the information flow enforcement process. The binding 
techniques affect the number and degree of additional reviews required by organizations. 
Related controls: AC -16, SC -16. 
(20)(19) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | VALIDATION OF METAD ATA  
When transferring information between different security domains, appl y the same security  policy 
filtering  to metadata as it applies to data payloads.  
Supplemental Guidance : This control enhancement requires the validation of metadata and the 
data to which the metadata applies.  Some organizations distinguish betwe en metadata and 
data payloads (i.e., only the data to which the metadata is bound). Other organizations do not 
make such distinctions, considering metadata and the data to which the metadata applies as 
part of the payload. All information (including metada ta and the data to which the metadata 
applies) is subject to filtering and inspection.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(21)(20) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | APPROVED SOLUTIONS   
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined solutions  in approved configurations ] to control the  
flow of [ Assignment: organization -defined information] across security domains.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations define approved solutions and configurations in cross -
domain policies and guidance in accordance with the types of information flows acro ss 
classification boundaries. The Unified Cross Domain Management Office provides a baseline listing of approved cross -domain solutions.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(22)(21) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | PHYSICAL AND  LOGICAL SEPARATION OF INFORMATION FLOWS    
Separate information flows logically or physically using [ Assignment: organization -defined 
mechanisms  and/or  techniques] to accomplish [ Assignment: organization -defined required 
separations by types of information ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Enforcing the separation  of information flows by type can  enhance 
protection by ensuring that information is not co mmingled while in transit and by enabling 
flow control by  transmission path s perhaps not otherwise achievable.  Types of separable 
information include, for example, i nbound and outbound communications traffic, service 
requests and responses, and  information of differing security categories . 
Related Controls :  SC-32. 
(23)(22) INFORMATION FLOW ENF ORCEMENT | ACCESS ONLY   
Provide access from a single device to computing platforms,  applications, or data residing on 
multiple different security domains,  while preventing any information flow between the different 
security domains.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The system, for example, provides a desktop for users to access each 
connected sec urity domain without providing any mechanisms to allow transfer of 
information between the different security domains.  
Related Controls :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 15 References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-162, 800-178. 
AC-5 SEPARATION OF DUTIES 
Control : 
a. Separat e [Assignment: organization- defined duties of individuals ]; 
b. Document separation of duties  of individuals ; and  
c. Define system access authorizations  to support separation of duties . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Separation of duties address es the potential for abuse of authorized 
privileges and helps to reduce the risk of malevolent activity without col lusion . Separation of 
duties include s, for example,  dividing mission  functions and system support functions among 
different individuals  and/or roles; conducting system support functions  with different individuals  
(e.g., system management, programming, conf iguration management, quality assurance ; and 
testing, and network security);  ensuring security personnel administer ing access control functions 
do not also administer audit functions . Because separation of duty violations can span systems and 
application d omains, organizations consider the entirety of organizational systems and system 
components when developing policy on separation of duties . 
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -3, AC -6, AU -9, CM -5, CM -11, CP -9, IA -2, IA -5, MA -3, MA -5, PS -2, 
SA-17. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AC-6 LEAST PRIVILEGE  
Control : Employ the principle  of least privilege, allowing only authorized accesses for users ( or 
processes acting on behalf of users) which are necessary to accomplish assigned tasks in 
accordance with o rganizational missions and business functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s employ least privilege for specific duties and systems. The 
principle of least privilege is also applied to system processes, ensuring that the processes operate 
at privilege levels no higher than necessary to acco mplish required organizational missions or 
business functions. Organizations consider  the creation of additional processes, roles , and system 
accounts as necessary , to achieve least privilege. O rganization s also a pply least privilege to  the 
development, implementation, and operation of organizational system s. 
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -3, AC -5, AC-16, CM -5, CM -11, PL-2, PM-12, SA -15, SA -17, SC -38.   
Control Enhancements :  
(1) LEAST PRIVILEGE | AUTHORIZE ACCESS TO  SECU RITY FUNCTIONS   
Explicitly authorize access to [ Assignment: organization- defined security functions (deployed in 
hardware, software, and firmware) and security- relevant information ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security functions include, for example, e stablis hing system accounts, 
configuring access authorizations (i.e., permissions, privileges), setting events to be audited, and setting establishing  intrusion detection parameters. Security -relevant information includes, 
for example, filtering rules for routers/firewalls, cryptographic key management information, configuration parameters for security services, and access control lists.  Explicitly authorized 
personnel include, for example, security administrators , system and network administrators, 
system security officers, system maintenance personnel, system programmer s, and other 
privileged users.  
Related Controls :  AC -17, AC -18, AC -19, AU-9, PE- 2. 
(2) LEAST PRIVILEGE | NON-PRIVILEGED ACCESS FO R NONSECURITY FUNCTI ONS  
Require that users of system accounts, or roles,  with access to [ Assignment: organization- defined 
security functions or security- relevant information ], use non- privileged accounts or roles, when 
accessing nonsecurity  functions.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 16 Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement limit s exposure when operat ing from within  
privileged accounts or roles. The inclusion of role s address es situations where organizations 
implement access control polic ies such as r ole-based access control and where a change of 
role provides the same degree of assurance in the change of access authorizations for both the 
user and all processes  acting on behalf of the user as would be provided by a change between 
a privileged and non- privileged account.  
Related Controls :  AC -17, AC -18, AC -19, PL -4. 
(3) LEAST PRIVILEGE | NETWORK ACCESS TO PRIVILEGED COMMANDS   
Authorize network access to [ Assignment: organization- defined privileged commands ] only for 
[Assignment: organization- defined compelling operational needs ] and document the rationale for 
such access in the security plan for the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Network access is any access across a network connection in lieu of 
local access ( i.e., user being physically present at the device ). 
Related Controls :  AC -17, AC -18, AC -19. 
(4) LEAST PRIVILEGE | SEPARATE PROCESSING  DOMAINS   
Provide sep arate processing domains to enable finer -grained allocation of user privileges.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Providing separate processing domains for finer -grained allocation of 
user privileges includes, for example, using virtualization techniques to allow ad ditional user 
privilege s within a virtual machine while restricting privilege s to other virtual machines or to 
the underlying actual machine ; employing hardware/software domain separation mechanisms; 
and implementing separate physical domains . 
Related Cont rols:  AC -4, SC-2, SC-3, SC -30, SC -32, SC -39. 
(5) LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS   
Restrict privileged  accounts on the system to [ Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or 
roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Privileged accounts, including s uper user acco unts, are typically 
described as system administrator for various types of commercial of f-the-shelf operating 
systems. Restricting privileged accounts to specific personnel or roles prevents day -to-day 
users from having access to privileged information/fun ctions . Organization s may differentiate 
in the application of this control enhancement between allowed privileges for local accounts 
and for domain accounts provided they  retain the ability to control system configuration s for 
key security parameters and as otherwise necessary to sufficiently mitigate risk.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, MA -3, MA -4. 
(6) LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGED ACCESS BY NON -ORGANIZATIONAL USERS   
Prohibit privileged access to the system by non -organizational users.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC -18, AC -19, IA -2, IA -8. 
(7) LEAST PRIVILEGE | REVIEW OF USER PRIV ILEGES  
(a) Review [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency] the privileges assigned to [ Assignment: 
organization- defined roles or classes of users] to validate the need for suc h privileges; and  
(b) Reassign or remove privileges, if necessary, to correctly reflect organizational mission and 
business needs.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The need for certain assigned user privileges may change over time 
reflecting changes in organizational m issions and business functions, environments of 
operation, technologies, or threat. Periodic review of assigned user privileges is necessary to 
determine if the rationale for assigning such privileges remains valid. If the need cannot be 
revalidated, organ izations take appropriate corrective actions.  
Related Controls :  CA -7. 
(8) LEAST PRIVILEGE | PRIVILEGE LEVELS FO R CODE EXECUTION   
Prevent  the following software from executing  at higher privilege levels than user s executing the 
software:  [Assignment : organizat ion-defined software ]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 17 Supplemental Guidance :  In certain situations, software applications/programs need to execute 
with elevated privileges to perform required functions. However, if the privileges required for 
execution are at a higher level than the pr ivileges assigned to organizational users invoking 
such applications/programs, those users are indirectly provided with greater privileges than 
assigned by organizations.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(9) LEAST PRIVILEGE | AUDITING USE OF PRI VILEGED FUNCTIONS  
Audi t the  execution of privileged functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Misuse of privileged functions, either intentionally or unintentionally 
by authorized users, or by unauthorized external entities that have compromised system 
accounts, is a serious and ongoi ng concern and can have significant adverse impacts on 
organizations. Auditing the use of privileged functions is one way to detect such misuse, and 
in doing so, help mitigate the risk from insider threats and the advanced persistent threat.  
Related Controls :  AU -2, AU- 12. 
(10) LEAST PRIVILEGE | PROHIBIT NON -PRIVILEGED USERS FRO M EXECUTING PRIVILEG ED FUNCTIONS  
Prevent non -privileged users from executing privileged functions . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Privileged functions include, for  example, disabling, circumven ting, or 
altering implemented security or privacy controls, establishing system accounts, performing 
system integrity checks, or administering cryptographic key management activities. Non -
privileged users are individuals that do not possess appropriate aut horizations. Circumventing 
intrusion detection and prevention mechanisms or malicious code protection mechanisms are examples of privileged functions that require protection from non -privileged users.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
AC-7 UNSUCC ESSFUL LOGON ATTEMPTS  
 Control : 
a. Enforce a limit of  [Assignment: organization -defined number ] consecutive invalid logon  
attempts by a user during a [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] ; and 
b. Automatically [ Selection (one or more): lock the account/ node for an [Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period]; lock the account/node until released by an administrator ; 
delay  next logon prompt per [Assignment: organization- defined delay algorithm ]; take 
[Assignment: organization -defined  action ]] when the m aximum number of unsuccessful 
attempts is exceeded.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies regardless of whether the logon occurs  via a local  or 
network  connection.  Due to the potential for denial of service, automatic lockouts initiated by 
system s are usually temporary and automatically release after a predetermined time established by 
organization s. If a delay algorithm is selected, organization s may employ different algorithms for 
different components  of the system  based on the capabilities of thos e components . Response s to 
unsuccessful logon attempts may be implemented at both the operating system and the application 
level s. 
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -9, AU -2, AU -6, IA -5. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON A TTEMPTS | AUTOMATIC ACCOUNT L OCK 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -7]. 
(2) UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON A TTEMPTS | PURGE OR WIPE MOBILE DEVICE   
Purge  or wipe  information from [Assignment: organization- defined mobile devices]  based on 
[Assignment: organization- defined purging or wiping requirements  and techniques ] after 
[Assignment: organization- defined number ] consecutive, unsuccessful device logon attempts . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 18 Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies only to mobile devices for which a 
logon occurs  (e.g., personal digital assistants , smart ph ones, tablets ).. The logon is to the 
mobile device, not to any one account on the device. S uccessful logons  to any account s on 
mobile device s reset the unsuccessful logon count to zero.  Organizations define  information 
to be purged/wiped  carefully in order  to avoid over purging /wiping  which may result in 
devices  becoming unusable. Purging or wiping may  be unnecessary if  the info rmation on the 
device is protected with sufficiently strong encryption mechanisms . 
Related Controls :  AC -19, MP -5, MP -6. 
(3) UNSUCCESSF UL LOGON ATTEMPTS | BIOMETRIC ATTEMPT L IMITING  
Limit the number of unsuccessful biometric logon attempts to [ Assignment: organization- defined 
number ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Biometrics are probabilistic in nature. The ability to successfully 
authenticate can be impacted by many factors, including matching performance and 
presentation attack detection mechanisms. Organizations select the appropriate number of 
attempts and fall back mechanisms for users based on these, and other organizationally 
defined fact ors. 
Related Controls :  IA-3. 
(4) UNSUCCESSFUL LOGON A TTEMPTS | USE OF ALTERNATE FAC TOR  
Allow the use of one or more additional authentication factors after  the number of organization-
defined consecutive invalid logon attempts have been exceeded . 
Supplemental  Guidance :  This control enhancement supports the objective of availability and 
allows a user that has inadvertently been locked out to use additional authentication factors to 
bypass the lockout.  
Related Controls :  IA-3. 
References :  NIST Special Publicat ions 800-63, 800-124. 
AC-8 SYSTEM USE NOTIFICATION  
Control : 
a. Display  [Assign ment: organization- defined system use notification message or banner ] to 
users before granting access to the system that provides privacy and security notices  
consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, 
and guidelines  and state that : 
1. Users are accessing a U.S. Government system;  
2. System usage may be monitored, recorded, and subject to audit;  
3. Unauthorized use of the system is prohibited and subject to criminal and civil penalties; and 
4. Use of the system indi cates consent to monitoring and recording;  
b. Retain the notification message or banner on the screen until users acknowledge the usage conditions and take explicit actions to log on to or further access the system; and  
c. For publicly accessible systems:  
1. Displa y system use information [ Assignment: organization- defined conditions ], before 
granting further access  to the publicly accessible system ; 
2. Display references, if any, to monitoring, recording, or auditing that are consistent with privacy accommodations for such systems that generally prohibit those activities; and  
3. Include a description of the authorized uses of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  System use notification s can be implemented using messages or warning 
banners displayed before  individuals log in to systems. System use notification s are used only for 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 19 access via logon interface s with human user s. Such notifications  are not require d when  human 
interface s do not exist. Based on an assessment of risk, organizations consider whether or not a 
secondary system use notification is needed to access applications or other system resources after 
the initial network logon. Organizations consider system use notification messages or banners 
displayed in multiple languages based on specific organizational needs an d the demographics of 
information system users. Organizations also consult with the Office of the General Counsel for 
legal review and approval of warning banner content.  
Related Controls :  AC -14, PL -4, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AC-9 PREVIOUS LOGON (ACCESS) NOTIFICATION  
Control :  Notify the user, upon successful logon (access)  to the system , of the date and time of the 
last logon (access).  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control is applicable to logons to systems via human user interfaces 
and logons to systems that occur in other types of architectures  (e.g., service -oriented 
architectures).  . 
Related Controls :  AC -7, PL- 4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIF ICATION | UNSUCCESSFUL LOGONS  
Notify the user, upon successful logon /access, of the number of unsuccessful logon/access 
attempts since the last successful logon/access.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIF ICATION | SUCCESSFUL AND  UNSUCCESSFUL LOGONS  
Notify the user , upon successful lo gon/access,  of the number of [ Selection: successful 
logons/accesses; unsuccessful log on/access attempts; both ] during [ Assignment: organization -
defined time -period].  
Supplemental Guidance :  None . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIF ICATION | NOTIF ICATION OF ACCOUNT CHANGES   
Notify the user , upon successful logon/access,  of changes to [ Assignment: organization- defined 
security- related characteristics/parameters of the user’s account ] during [ Assignment: 
organiza tion-defined time -period ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) PREVIOUS LOGON NOTIF ICATION | ADDITIONAL LOGON IN FORMATION   
Notify the user, upon successful logon /access, of the following additional information: 
[Assignment: organization- defined information to be included in addition to the date and time of 
the last logon/ access] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement permits organization s to specify additional 
information to be provided to user s upon logon including, for example, the location  of last 
logon. User lo cation is defined as that information which can be determined by system s, for 
example, Internet Protocol ( IP) address es from which network logons  occurred, notification s 
of local logons, or device identifier s. 
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 20 AC-10 CONCURRENT SESSION CONTROL  
Control :  Limit the number of concurrent sessions for each [ Assignment: organization- defined 
account  and/or account type ] to [Assignment: organization- defined number ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s may define the maxi mum number of concurrent sessions for 
system account s globally, by account type  (e.g., privileged user, non -privileged user, domain, 
specific application) ,, by account, or a combination  thereof . For example, organizations may limit 
the number of concurrent  sessions for system administrators or other individuals working in 
particularly sensitive domains or mission -critical applications. This control addresses concurrent 
sessions for system account s and does not address concurrent sessions by single user s via multiple 
system accounts.  
Related Controls :  SC-23. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AC-11 SESSION DEVICE  LOCK  
Control : 
a. Prevent further access to the system by initiating a device lock after [ Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period] of inactivity or upon receiving a request from a user;  and 
b. Retain the session device lock until the user reestablishes access using established 
identification and authentication procedures.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Session Device  locks are temporary action s taken to prevent logical access 
to organizational systems  when user s stop work and move  away from the immediate vicinity of 
those  system s but do not want to log out because of the te mporary nature of their absences. 
Session Device  locks are implemented where sessi on activities can be determined. This is typically  
at the operating system level, but can also be at the application level. S ession Device locks are not 
an acceptable substitute for logging out of systems, for example, if organizations require users to 
log out at the end of workdays.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -7, IA-11. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SESSION DEVICE  LOCK | PATTERN -HIDING DISPLAYS  
Conceal , via the session device lock,  information previously visible on the display with a publicly 
viewable image.  
Suppl emental Guidance :  Publicly viewable images The pattern -hiding display  can inc lude static 
or dynamic images, for example, patterns  used with screen savers , photographic  images, solid 
colors, clock, battery life indicator, or a blank screen , with the additio nal caveat that none of 
the images  convey sensitive controlled unclassified  information  is not displayed . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) DEVICE LOCK | REQUIRE USER -INITIATED LOCK  
Require the user to initiate a device lock before leaving the system unattended . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is behavior/policy -based and as such , 
requires users to take physical action to initiate the device lock . 
Related Controls :  PL-4. 
References :  None . 
AC-12 SESSION TERMINATION  
Control :  Automatically terminate a user session after [ Assignment: organization -defined  conditions 
or trigger events requiring session disconnect ].  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 21 Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the termination of user -initiated logical sessions in 
contrast to SC -10 which addresses the t ermination of network connections that are associated with 
communications sessions (i.e., network disconnect). A logical session (for local, network, and 
remote access) is initiated whenever a user (or process acting on behalf of a user) accesses an 
organi zational system. Such user sessions can be terminated (and thus terminate user access) 
without terminating network sessions. Session termination terminates all processes associated with a user’s logical session except those processes that are specifically created by the user (i.e., session owner) to continue after the session is terminated. Conditions or trigger events requiring automatic 
session termination can include, for example, organization -defined periods of user inactivity, 
targeted responses to cer tain types of incidents, time -of-day restrictions on system use.  
Related Controls :  MA -4, SC -10, SC -23. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SESSION TERMINATION | USER -INITIATED LOGOUTS  / MESSAGE DISPLAYS   
Provide a logout capability  for user -initiated communications sessions whenever authentication is 
used to gain access to  [Assignment: organization -defined information resources].  
(1) Displays an explicit logout message to users indicating the reliable termination of authenticated 
communications sessions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Information resources to which users gain access via authentication 
include, for example,  local workstations, databases, and p assword -protected websites /web-
based services . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SESSION TERMINATION | TERMINATION MESSAGE  
Display an  explicit logout message to users indicating the reliable termination of authenticated 
communications sessions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Logout message s for web page access, for example, can be displayed 
after authenticated sessions have been terminated. Ho wever, for some types of interactive 
sessions including, for example, file transfer protocol (FTP) sessions, systems typically send logout messages as final messages prior to terminating sessions.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SESSION TERMINATION | TIMEOUT WARN ING MESSAGE  
Display an explicit message to users indicating that the session is about to end.  
Supplemental Guidance :  To increase usability, notify users of pending session termination and 
prompt for activity if users desire to continue the session.  
Relat ed Controls :  None.  
References:   None.  
AC-13 SUPERVISION AND REVIEW — ACCESS CONTROL  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -2 and AU -6]. 
AC-14 PERMITTED ACTIONS WITHOUT IDENTIFICATION OR AUTHENTICATION  
Control : 
a. Identif y [Assignment: organization- defined user act ions] that can be performed on the system 
without identification or authentication  consistent with organizational missions and business 
functions ; and  
b. Document and provide supporting rationale in the security plan for the system, user actions 
not requiring  identification or authentication.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses situations in which  organizations  determine that no 
identification or authentication is required  in organizational systems. O rganization s may allow a 
limited number of user a ctions without identification or authentication  including, for example, 
when individuals access public websites or other publicly accessible federal systems , when 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 22 individuals use mobile phones to receive calls, or when facsimiles are received . Organization s also 
identify actions that normally require identification or authentication but may under certain 
circumstances  (e.g., emergencies ),, allow identification or authentication mechanisms to be 
bypassed. Such bypass es may occur , for example, via a software -readable physical switch that 
commands bypass of the logon functionality and is protected from accidental or unmonitored use. 
This control does not apply to situations where identification and authentication have already 
occurred and are not repeated, but rather to situations where identification and  authentication have 
not yet occurred.  Organizations may decide that there are no user actions that can be performed on 
organizational systems without identification and authentication and therefore, the values for 
assignment statements can be none . 
Related Controls :  AC -8, IA-2, PL-2. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
(1) PERMITTED ACTIONS WI THOUT IDENTIFICATION OR AUTHENTICATION | NECESSARY USES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -14]. 
References :  None.  
AC-15 AUTOMATED MA RKING  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP-3]. 
AC-16 SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES  
Control : 
a. Provide the means to associate [ Assignment: organization- defined types of security and 
privacy attributes ] having [ Assignment: organization -defined security and privacy attribute 
values ] with information in storage, in process, and/or in transmission;  
b. Ensure that the security and privacy attribute associations are made and retained with the 
information;  
c. Establish the permitted [ Assig nment: organization- defined security  attributes ] for 
[Assignment: organization -defined systems ]; and  
d. Determine the permitted [ Assignment: organization- defined values or ranges ] for each of the 
established security and privacy attributes . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information is represented int ernally within systems using abstractions 
known as data structures. Internal data structures can represent different types of entities, both active and passive. Active entities, also known as subjects , are typically associated with 
individuals, devices, or  processes acting on behalf of individuals. Passive entities, also known as 
objects , are typically associated with data structures such as records, buffers, tables, files, inter -
process pipes, and communications ports. Security attributes , a form of metadata,  are abstractions 
representing the basic properties or characteristics of active and passive entit ies with respect to 
safeguarding information.  Privacy attributes, which may be used independently, or in conjunction 
with security attributes, repres ent th e basic properties or  characteristics of an entity with r espect to 
the management of personally identifiable information. Such attributes are used to enable the 
implementation of the need for the record in the performance of duties, the identification of 
personal information within data objects, and the identification of permitted uses of personal 
information. Attributes can be explicitly or implicitly associated with the information contained in 
organizational systems or system components.  
Security and pri vacy  attributes may be associated with active entities (i.e., subjects) that have the 
potential to send or receive information, to cause informati on to flow among objects, or to change 
the system state. These attributes may also be associated with  passiv e entities (i.e., objects) that 
contain or receive information. The association of security and privacy attributes to subjects and 
objects is referred to as binding  and is inclusive of setting the attribute value and the attribute type. 
Security and privacy attributes when bound to data or information, enable the enforcement  of 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 23 security policies for access control and information flow control  and privacy policies including, 
for example, for data retention limits and permitted uses of personally identifiable information. 
Such enforcement occurs  through organizational processes or system functions or mechanisms . 
Binding techniques implemented by systems affect the strength of attribute binding to information.  
Binding strength and the assurance associated with bi nding techniques play an important part in 
the trust organizations have in the information flow enforcement process. The binding techniques 
affect the number and degree of additional reviews required by organizations. The  content or 
assigned values of the security and privacy  attributes can directly affect the ability of individuals 
to access organizational information.  
Organizations can define the types of attributes needed for selected systems to support missions or 
business functions. There is potentiall y a wide range of values that can be assigned to any given 
security attribute. Release markings can include, for example, US only, NATO, or NOFORN (not releasable to foreign nationals). By specifying permitted attribute ranges and values, organizations ensure that the security and privacy attribute values are meaningful and relevant. The term security 
Labeling r efers to the association of secur ity and privacy attributes with subjects and objects 
represented by the internal data structures  within organizatio nal systems. This facilitates  system -
based enforcement  of information security and privacy policies . Security Labels include, for 
example, access authorizations , nationality, data life cycle protection ( i.e., encryption  and data 
expiration) , data subject consents, permissible data uses, affiliation as contractor, and  
classification  of information  in accordance with legal and compliance requirements . Conversely,  
marking refers to the association of security and privacy attributes with objects in a human -
readable form . This enables  manual, procedural, or  process -based  enforcement of information 
security and privacy policies . The AC -16 base control represents the requirement for user -based 
attribute association (marking) . The enhancements  to AC -16 represent add itional requirements 
including information system -based attribute association (labeling Examples of attribute types 
include classification level for objects and clearance (access authorization) level for subjects. An 
example of aattribute  value for both attribute types is Top Secret . 
Related Controls :  AC -3, AC -4, AC-6, AC -21, AC -25, AU -2, AU -10, IP-2, MP-3, PE-22, SC-11, 
SC-16, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  
(1) SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | DYNAMIC ATTRIBUTE A SSOCIATION  
Dynamically associate security  and pr ivacy  attributes with [ Assignment: organization -defined 
subjects and object s] in accordance with [Assignment: organization -defined security and privacy 
policies] as information is created and combined.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Dynamic association of securit y and privacy attributes  is appropriate 
whenever the security or privacy characteristics of information change s over time. Attributes 
may change, for example, due to information aggregation issues (i.e., the security  and privacy  
characteristics of individu al information elements are different from the combined elements ), 
changes in individual access authorizations (i.e., privileges), changes in the security category 
of information, and changes in security or privacy policies . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SECURI TY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE VALUE CHANGES BY AUTHORIZED I NDIVIDUALS   
Provide  authorized  individuals (or processes acting on behalf of individuals) the capability  to 
define or change the value of associated security and privacy attributes.  
Supplem ental Guidance :  The content or assigned values of security and privacy attributes can 
directly affect the ability of individuals to access organizational information. Therefore, it is important for systems to be able to limit the ability to create or modify attributes to authorized 
individuals.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) SECURITY  AND PRIVACY  ATTRIBUTES | MAINTENANCE OF ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATIONS B Y SYSTEM   
Maintain the association  and integrity of [Assignment: organization- defined security and privacy 
attributes ] to [Assignment: organization- defined subjects and objects ]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 24 Supplemental Guidance :  Maintaining the association and integrity of security and privacy 
attributes to subjects and objects with sufficient assurance helps to ensure that the attribute 
associat ions can be used as the basis of automated policy actions. Automated policy actions 
include , for example,  retention date expirations , access control decisions , and information 
flow control decisions . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ASSOCIATION OF ATTR IBUTES BY AUTHORIZED  INDIVIDUALS   
Provide the capability to associate [ Assignment: organization- defined security and privacy 
attributes ] with [Assignment: organization- defined subjects and objects] by authorized individuals 
(or proces ses acting on behalf of individuals) . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The support provided by system s can include, for example, prompting 
users to select specific security or privacy attributes to be associated with specific information 
objects ; employing automate d mechanisms to categorize information with ap propriate 
security or privacy attributes based on defined polic ies; or ensuring that the combination of 
selected security  or privacy  attributes selected is valid. Organizations consider  the creation, 
deletion, or modification of security and privacy attributes  when defining auditable events . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE DISPLAYS FOR OUTPUT DEVICES   
Display security  and privacy  attributes in human -readable form on each object that the system 
transmits to output devices to identify [ Assignment: organization- identified special dissemination, 
handling, or distribution instructions ] using [ Assignment: organization- identified human- readable, 
standard naming conventions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  System outputs include, for example, pages, screens, or equivalent. 
System o utput devices include, for example, printers , notebook  computers , video displays on 
computer workstations, and personal digital assistants.  To mitigate the risk of unauthorized 
exposure of selected information, for example, shoulder surfing , the outputs  display full 
attribute values when unmasked by the subscriber.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | MAINTENANCE OF ATTRIBUTE ASSOCIATION BY  ORGA NIZATION  
Require personnel to associate, and maintain the association of [ Assignment: organization -defined 
security and privacy attributes ] with [Assignment: organization- defined subjects and object s] in 
accordance with [Assignment: organization -defined security  and privacy policies] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement requires individual users  (as opposed to the 
system)  to maintain associations of security  and privacy  attributes with subjects and objects . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(7) SECURITY AND  PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | CONSISTENT ATTRIBUT E INTERPRETATION  
Provide a consistent interpretation of security and privacy attributes transmitted between 
distributed system components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  To enforce security and privacy policies across multiple components in 
distributed systems  (e.g., distributed database management systems, cloud -based systems, and 
service -oriented architectures) ,, organizations provide a consistent interpretation of the 
attributes used in access enforcement and flow enforcement decisions. Organizations establish 
agreements and processes to ensure that all distributed system components implement security 
and privacy attributes with consistent interpretations in automated access and flow 
enforcement actions.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ASSOCIATION TECHNIQ UES AND TECHNOLOGIES   
Implement  [Assignment: organization -defined techniques and  technologies ] with [Assignment: 
organization- defined level of assurance] in associating  security and privacy attributes to 
information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The association (i.e., binding) of security and privacy attributes to 
information within systems is important for conducting automated access enforcement and 
flow enforcement actions. The association of such at tributes can be accomplished with 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 25 technologies and techniques providing different levels of assurance. For example, systems can 
cryptographically bind attributes to information using digital signatures with the supporting 
cryptographic keys protected by hardware devices (sometimes known as hardware roots of 
trust).  
(9) Related Controls :  None. SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE REASSIGNM ENT  
Reassign security and privacy attributes  associated with information only via re- grading 
mechanism s validated usi ng [Assignment: organization- defined techniques or procedures ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Validated re- grading mechanisms are employed by organizations to 
provide the requisite levels of assurance for security and privacy attribute reassignment 
activities. T he validation is facilitated by ensuring that re -grading mechanisms are single 
purpose and of limited function. Since attribute reassignments can directly affect security and 
privacy policy enforcement actions  (e.g., access /flow enforcement decisions), , using 
trustworthy re -grading mechanisms is necessary to ensure that such mechanisms perform in a 
consistent and correct mode of operation.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(10) SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | ATTRIBUTE CONFIGURA TION BY AUTHORIZED I NDIVIDUALS   
Provide  authorized individuals the capability  to define or change the type and value of security  and 
privacy  attributes  available for association with subjects and objects.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The content or assigned values of security  and privacy  attributes ca n 
directly affect the ability of individuals to access organizational information. Therefore, it is 
important for systems to be able to limit the ability to create or modify attributes to authorized 
individuals only.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(11) SECURITY AND P RIVACY ATTRIBUTES | AUDIT CHANGES   
Audit changes to security and privacy attributes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 186-4; NIST Special Publication s 800-162, 800-178. 
AC-17 REMOTE ACCESS  
Control : 
a. Establish and document usage restrictions, configuration/connection requirements, and 
implementation guidance for each type of remote access  allowed ; and 
b. Authorize remote access to the system prior to allowing such connections.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Remote access is access to organizational system s by user s (or process es 
acting on behalf of user s) communicating through external networks such as the Internet. R emote 
access methods incl ude, for example,  dial-up, broadband, and wireless . Organizations often 
employ encrypted v irtual private network s (VPNs) to enhance confidentiality and integrity over 
remote connections. The use of encrypted VPNs does not make the access non -remote; howeve r, 
the use of VPNs, when adequately provisioned with appropriate security controls  (e.g., employing 
appropriate encryption techniques for confidentiality and integrity protection) may 
provide provides  sufficient assurance to the organization that it can eff ectively treat such 
connections as internal networks  if the cryptographic mechanisms used are implemented in 
accordance with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards , and 
guidelines.  Still, VPN connections traverse ex ternal networks, and the encrypted VPN does not 
enhance the availability of remote connections.  VPNs with encrypted tunnels can also affect the 
capability to adequately monitor network communications traffic for malicious code . Remote 
access controls apply  to systems other than public web servers  or systems designed for public  
access. This control addresses  authorization prior to allowing remote access without specifying the 
specific format s for such authorization. While organization s may use interconnectio n security 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 26 agreement s to authorize remote access  connections,  such agreements are not required by this 
control. Enforcing access restrictions for remote connections is  addressed in AC -3. 
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC-3, AC-4, AC -18, AC -19, AC-20, CM-10, IA-2, IA-3, IA -8, MA -4, PE-
17, PL -2, PL -4, SC -10, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) REMOTE ACCESS | AUTOMATED MONITORIN G AND CONTROL   
Monitor and control remote access methods.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated monitoring and control of remote access sessions methods  
allows organizations to detect cyber attacks and also ensure  ongoing compliance with remote 
access policies by audit ing connection activities of remote users on a variety of system 
components  including, for example,  servers, workstations, notebook  compute rs, smart phones, 
and tablets . 
Related Controls :  AU -2, AU- 6, AU -12, AU -14. 
(2) REMOTE ACCESS | PROTECTION OF CONFI DENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY USING ENC RYPTION   
Implement cryptographic mechanisms  to protect the confidentiality and integrity of remote access 
sessi ons. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The encryption strength of mechanism is selected based on the security 
categorization  of the information.  
Related Controls :  SC-8, SC-12, SC -13. 
(3) REMOTE ACCESS | MANAGED ACCESS CONT ROL POINTS   
Route all remote accesses through  [Assignment: organization- defined number ] managed network 
access control points.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Limiting the number of access control points for remote accesses 
reduces the attack surface for organizations. Organizations consider the Trusted Intern et 
Connections initiative requirements for external network connections.  
Related Controls :  SC-7. 
(4) REMOTE ACCESS | PRIVILEGED COMMANDS  AND ACCESS  
(a) Authorize the execution of privileged commands and access to security -relevant information  
via remote access on ly for [ Assignment: organization- defined needs];  and 
(b) Document the rationale for such access in the security plan for the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC -6. 
(5) REMOTE ACCESS | MONITORING FOR UNAU THORIZED CONNECTIONS   
[Withdrawn: Inc orporated into SI -4]. 
(6) REMOTE ACCESS | PROTECTION OF INFOR MATION   
Protect information about remote access mechanisms from unauthorized use and disclosure.  
Supplemental Guidanc e:  None.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, PS -6. 
(7) REMOTE ACCESS | ADDITIONAL PROTECTI ON FOR SECURITY FUNCTION ACCESS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -3(10)]. 
(8) REMOTE ACCESS | DISABLE NONSECURE N ETWORK PROTOCOLS   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM -7]. 
(9) REMOTE ACCESS | DISCONNECT OR DISABLE ACCESS   
Provide the capability to expeditiously disconnect or disable remote access to the system within 
[Assignment: organization- defined time -period ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement requires organizations to have the capability 
to rapidly disconnect current users remotely accessing the syst em or disable further remote 
access. The speed of disconnect or disablement varies based on the criticality of missions or 
business functions and the need to eliminate immediate or future remote access to systems.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 27 Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST  Special Publication s 800-46, 800-77, 800-113, 800-114, 800-121; NIST 
Interagency Report 7966 . 
AC-18 WIRELESS ACCESS  
Control : 
a. Establish usage restrictions , configuration/connection requirements,  and implementation 
guidance for wirele ss access;  and 
b. Authorize wireless access to the system prior to allowing such connection s. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Wireless technologies include, for example , microwave, packet radio 
(ultra-high frequency/very high frequency ), 802.11x, and Bluetooth. Wireless networks use 
authentication protocols (e.g., EAP/TLS, PEAP), which provide credential protection and mutual 
authentication.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -3, AC -17, AC -19, CA-9, CM-7, IA-2, IA -3, IA -8, PL -4, SC-40, SC -
43, SI-4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) WIREL ESS ACCESS | AUTHENTICATION AND ENCRYPTION  
Protect wireless access to the system using authentication of [Selection (one or more): users; 
devices] and encryption.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SC-8, SC -13. 
(2) WIRELESS ACCESS | MONITORING UN AUTHORIZED CONNECTIO NS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -4]. 
(3) WIRELESS ACCESS | DISABLE WIRELESS NETWORKING  
Disable, when not intended for use, wireless networking capabilities internally embedded within 
system components prior to issuance and deployment.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) WIRELESS ACCESS | RESTRICT CONFIGURAT IONS BY USERS  
Identify and explicitly authorize users allowed to independently configure wireless networking 
capabilities.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational a uthorizations to allow selected users to configure 
wireless networking capability are enforced in part, by the access enforcement mechanisms 
employed within organizational systems.  
Related Controls :  SC-7, SC -15. 
(5) WIRELESS ACCESS | ANTENNAS AND  TRANSMISSION  POWER LEVELS  
Select radio antennas and calibrate transmission power levels to reduce the probability that 
signals  from wireless access points can be received outside of organization -controlled boundaries.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Actions  that may be taken by organizations to  limit the unauthorized 
use of wireless communications outside  of organization -controlled boundaries include, for 
example , reducing the power of wireless transmissions so that the transmissions are less likely 
to emit a signal that can be used by adversaries captured  outside of the physical  perimeters  of 
the organization ; employing measures such as TEMPEST emissions security  to control 
wireless emanations; and  using directional  or beam forming antenna s that reduce the 
likelihood that unint ended receivers will be able to intercept signals. Prior to taking such 
mitigating actions, organizations can conduct period ic wireless surveys to understand the 
radio frequency profile of organizational systems as well as other systems tha t may be 
operati ng in the area.  
Related Controls :  PE-19. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 28 References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 48, 800-94, 800-97. 
AC-19 ACCESS CONTROL FOR MOBILE DEVICES  
Control : 
a. Establish usage restrictions , configuration requirements, connection requirement s, and 
implementation guidance for organization -controlled mobile devices ; 
b. Authorize the connection of mobile devices to organizational systems ; and  
c. Protect and control  mobile devices when  outside of controlled areas . 
Supplemental Guidance :  A mobile devic e is a computing device that  has a small form factor such 
that it can easily be carried by a single individual; is designed to operate without a physical 
connection; possesses local, non -removable or removable data storage; and includes a self -
contained po wer source. Mobile device functionality  may also include voice communication 
capabilities, on -board sensors that allow the device to capture information, and/or built- in features 
for synchronizing local data with remote locations. Examples include  smart ph ones, E -readers, and 
tablets. Mobile devices are typically associated with a single individual and the device is usually 
near the individual; however, the degree of proximity can vary  depending upon on the form factor 
and size of the device. The processing , storage, and transmission capability of the mobile device 
may be comparabl e to or merely a subset of notebook/ desktop systems, depending upon the nature 
and intended purpose of the device.  Controlled area s are areas or spaces  for which organizations  
provide sufficient physical  or procedural safeguards  to meet the requirements established for 
protecting information and  system s. 
Due to the large variety of mobile devices with different  technical  characteristics and capabilities, 
organizational restrictions may vary for the different classes/types of such devices. Usage 
restrictions and specific implementation guidance for mobile devices include, for example, 
configuration management, device identification and authentication, implementation of  mandatory 
prote ctive software (e.g., malicious code detection, firewall), , scanning devices for mali cious code, 
updating virus protection software, scanning for critical software updates and patches, conducting primary operating system (and possibly other resident softwa re) integrity checks, and disabl ing 
unnecessary hardware (e.g., wireless , infrared ). Organizations are cautioned that . 
Usage restrictions and authorization to connect may vary among organizational systems. For 
example, the organization may authorize the co nnection of mobile devices to the organizational 
network and impose a set of usage restrictions while a system owner may withhold authorization 
for mobile device connection to specific applications or may impose additional usage restrictions 
before allowin g mobile device connections to a system.  The need to provide adequate security for 
mobile devices goes beyond the requirem ents in this control . Many safeguards for mobile devices 
are reflected in  other security controls allocated to  the initial control bas elines as starting points for 
the development of security plans and overlays using the tailoring process. There may also be 
some overlap by the security controls within the different families of controls.  AC-20 addresses 
mobile devices that are not organization -controlled.  
Related Controls :  AC -3, AC -4, AC -7, AC -17, AC -18, AC -20, CA -9, CM -2, CM -6, IA -3, MP -2, 
MP-4, MP -5, MP -7, PL -4, SC -7, SC -34, SC -43, SI -3, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACCESS CONTROL FOR M OBILE DEVICES | USE OF WRITABLE AND PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICES  
[With drawn: Incorporated into MP -7]. 
(2) ACCESS CONTROL FOR M OBILE DEVICES | USE OF PERSONALLY O WNED PORTABLE STORAG E DEVICES  
[With drawn: Incorporated into MP -7]. 
(3) ACCESS CONTROL FOR M OBILE DEVICES | USE OF PORTABLE STO RAGE DEVICES WITH NO  IDENTIFIABLE 
OWNER  
[With drawn: Incorporated into MP -7]. 
(4) ACCESS CONTROL FOR M OBILE DEVICES | RESTRICTIONS FOR CL ASSIFIED INFORMATION  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 29 (a) Prohibit the use of unclassified mobile devices in  facilities containing systems processing, 
storing, or transmitting classified informa tion unless specifically permitted by the authorizing 
official; and  
(b) Enforce the following restrictions on individuals permitted by the authorizing official to use 
unclassified mobile devices in facilities containing systems processing, storing, or 
transmit ting classified information : 
(1) Connection of unclassified mobile devices to classified systems is prohibited;  
(2) Connection of unclassified mobile devices to unclassified systems requires approval 
from the authorizing official;  
(3) Use of internal or external modem s or wireless interfaces within the unclassified mobile 
devices is prohibited; and  
(4) Unclassified mobile devices and the information stored on those devices are subject to 
random reviews and inspections by [ Assignment: organization- defined security officials], 
and if classified information is found, the incident handling policy is followed.  
(c) Restrict the connection of classified mobile devices to classified systems in accordance with 
[Assignment: organization- defined security policies].  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CM -8, IR -4. 
(5) ACCESS CONTROL FOR M OBILE DEVICES | FULL DEVICE AND  CONTAINER -BASED ENCRYPTION  
Employ [ Selection: full -device encryption; container encryption ] to protect the confidentiality and 
integrity of information on [ Assignment : organization- defined mobile devices].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Container -based encryption provides a more fine -grained approach to 
the encryption of data/information on mobile devices, including, for example, encrypting 
selected data structures such as fi les, records, or fields.  
Related Controls :  SC-13, SC -28. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 114, 800-124, 800-164. 
AC-20 USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEMS  
Control :  Establish terms and conditions , consistent with any trust relationships establish ed with 
other organizations owning, operating, and/or maintaining external systems, allowing authorized 
individuals to:  
a. Access the system from external system s; and  
b. Process, store, or transmit organization -controlled information using external system s. 
Supplemental Guidance :  External systems are systems or components of systems that are outside of 
the authorization boundary established by organizations and for which organizations typically 
have no direct supervision and authority over the application of re quired security controls or the 
assessment of control effectiveness. External systems include, for example,  personally owned 
systems , components, or devices  (e.g., notebook computers, smart phones, tablets, personal digital 
assistants) ; privately owned com puting and communications devices in commercial or public 
facilities  (e.g., hotels, train stations, convention centers, shopping malls, or airports); ; systems 
owned or controlled by nonfederal organizations; and federal systems that are not owned by, operated by, or under the direct supervision and authority of the organization. This includes 
systems managed by contractors, systems owned by other federal agencies, and systems owned by 
other organizations . within the same agency.  This control addresses the use of external systems for 
the processing, storage, or transmission  of organizational information , including, for example, 
accessing cloud services (e.g., infrastructure as a service, platform as a service, or software as a 
service) from organizational systems.  
For some external systems  (i.e., systems operated by other federal agencies  and organizations 
subordinate to those agencies ), the trust relationships that have been established between those 
organizations and the originating organization may be such, that no explicit terms and conditions are required. S ystems within  these organizations may not be considered external. These situations 
occur when, for example, there are pre-existing sharing and trust agreement s (either implicit or 
explicit) established  between federal agencies or organizations subordinate to those agencies, or 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 30 when such trust agreements are specified by applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, 
regulations, or policies. Authorized individuals include, for example, organizational pe rsonnel, 
contractors, or other individuals with authorized access to organizational system s and over which 
organization s have  the authority to impose specific rules of behavior with regard to system access.  
Restrictions that organization s impose on authori zed individuals need not be uniform, as those 
restrictions may vary depending on the trust relationship s between organizations. Therefore, 
organization s may choose to impose  different security restrictions on contractor s than on state, 
local, or tribal governments . 
This control does not apply to external systems used to access public interfaces to organizational 
systems  (e.g., individuals accessing federal information through www.usa.gov). . Organizations  
establish specific terms and conditions for the use of external systems in accordance with 
organizational security policies and procedures.  Terms and conditions address as a minimum: the 
specific types of applications that can be accessed on organizational systems from external 
systems; and the highest secur ity category of information that can be processed, stored, or 
transmitted on external systems. If the terms and co nditions with the owners of external systems 
cannot be established, organizations may impose restrictions on organizational personnel using 
those external systems.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -3, AC-17, AC-19, CA -3, PL -2, PL-4, SA-9, SC -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) USE OF EXTERNAL SYST EMS | LIMITS ON AUTHORIZE D USE  
Permit  authorized individuals to use  an external system to access the system or to pr ocess, store, 
or transmit organization- controlled information only after : 
(a) Verification of  the implementation of required security and privacy controls on the external 
system as specified in the organization’s security and privacy policies and security plan and 
privacy plans; or 
(b) Retention of  approved system connection or processing agreements with the organizational 
entity hosting the external system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement recognizes that there are circumstances 
where individuals us ing external systems (e.g., contractors, coalition partners) need to access 
organizational systems. In those situations, organizations need confidence that the external 
systems contain the necessary security safeguards (i.e., security controls so as not to  
compromise, damage, or otherwise harm organizational systems. Verification that the required security controls have been implemented can be achieved, for example, by external, 
independent assessments, attestations, or other means, depending on the confide nce level 
required by organizations.  
Related Controls :  CA -2. 
(2) USE OF EXTERNAL SYST EMS | PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICES  
[Selection: Restrict the use of organization -controlled portable storage devices by authorized 
individuals on external systems using the follow ing [Assignment: organization- defined 
restrictions]; Prohibit the use of organization- controlled portable storage devices by authorized 
individuals on external systems ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Limits on the use of organization -controlled portable storage devices 
in external systems include, for example, complete prohibition of the use of such devices or 
restrictions on how the devices may be used and under what conditions the devices may be 
used.  
Related Controls :  MP -7, SC -41. 
(3) USE OF EXTERNAL SYST EMS | NON-ORGANIZATIONALLY OWN ED SYSTEMS AND COMPONENTS  / DEVICES  
[Selection: Restrict the use of non -organizationally owned systems or system components , or 
devices to process, store, or transmit organizational information using the following [Assignment: 
organi zation -defined restrictions]; Prohibit the use of non- organizationally owned systems or 
system components to process, store, or transmit organizational information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Non -organizationally owned devices systems or system components  
include devices systems or system components  owned by other organizations (e.g., 
federal /state agencies, contractors) and personally owned devices. There are potential risks to 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 31 using non -organizationally owned devices. systems or system components.  In some cas es, the 
risk is sufficiently high as to prohibit such use. In other cases , itthe use of such systems or 
system components  may be  such that the use of non-organizationally owned devices is 
allowed but restricted in some way.  Restriction s include, for exampl e, requiring the 
implementation of approved security and privacy controls prior to authorizing such 
connections; the connection  of non -organizationally owned systems and components ; limiting 
access to certain types of information, services, or applications ; using virtualization 
techniques to limit processing and storage activities to servers or other system components 
provisioned by the organization; and  agreeing to the specified terms and conditions for  usage.  
Organizations consult with the Office of the G eneral Counsel regarding any legal issues 
associated with using personally owned devices  in operational environments , including, for 
example, requirements for conducting forensic analyses during investigations after an 
incident.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) USE OF EXTERNAL SYSTEM S | NETWORK ACCESSIBLE STORAGE DEVICES  
Prohibit the use of [ Assignment: organization- defined network accessible storage devices] in 
external systems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Network accessible storage devices in external systems includ e, for 
example, online storage devices in public, hybrid, or community cloud- based systems.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 199. 
AC-21 INFORMATION SHARING  
Control : 
a. Facilitate information sharing by enabling authorized users to determine whether access authorizations assigned to the sharing partner match the access restrictions and privacy 
authorizations  on the information for [ Assignment: organization- defined information sharing 
circumstances where user discretion is required ]; and  
b. Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined automated mechanisms or manual processes ] to 
assist users in making information sharing and collaboration decisions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to information that may be restricted in some manner 
based on some formal or administrative determination . Examples of such information  include , 
contract -sensitive  information , proprietary  information , classified information related to spe cial 
access programs  or compartments, privileged medical information , and personally identifiable 
information . Risk analyses and privacy impact analyses can provide useful inputs to these 
determinations. Depending on the  particular  information -sharing circ umstance s, sharing partner s 
may be defined at the individual, group, or organization al level . Information may be defined by 
content, type, security categor y, or special access program/compartment.  
Related Controls :  AC -3, AC -4, AC -16, SC -15. 
 Control Enhancements :  
(1) INFORMATION SHARING | AUTOMATED DECISION SUPPORT  
Enforce  information -sharing decisions by authorized users based on access authorizations of 
sharing partners and access restrictions on information to be shared.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) INFORMATION SHARING | INFORMATION SEARCH AND RETRIEVAL  
Implement information search and retrieval services that enforce [ Assignment: organization-
defined information sharing restrictions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Control s:  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 32 References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 150; NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
AC-22 PUBLICLY ACCESSIBLE CONTENT  
Control : 
a. Designate individuals authorized to post  information onto a publicly accessible system;  
b. Train authorized individuals to ensur e that publicly  accessible information does not contain  
nonpublic information;  
c. Review the proposed content of information prior to posting onto the publicly accessible 
system to ensure that nonpublic information is not included; and  
d. Review the content on the publicly accessible system for nonpublic information  [Assignment: 
organization- defined freq uency ] and remove such information, if discovered . 
Supplemental Guidance :  In accordance with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, 
regulations, standards, and guidelines , the public is not authorized access to nonpublic information  
including, for example, information protected under the Privacy Act and proprietary information . 
This control addresses systems that are controlled by the organizatio n and accessible to the public, 
typically without identification or authentication. The postin g of information on non -organization 
systems is covered by organizational policy . 
Related Controls :  AC -3, AT -2, AT -3, AU- 13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AC-23 DATA MINING PROTECTION  
Control :  Employ  [Assignment: organization- defined data mining prevention and detection 
techniques ] for [Assignment: organization- defined data storage objects ] to adequately detect and 
protect against  unauthorized  data mining.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Data storage objects include, for example, databases, database records, and 
database fields. Data mining prevention and detection techniques include, for example , limiting 
the types of responses provided to database queries; limiting the number  and the frequency of 
database queries  to increase the work factor needed to determine the contents of such databases; 
and notifying organizational personnel when atypical database queries or accesses occur . This 
control focuses on the protection of organizational information from data mining while such 
information resides in organizational data stores. In contrast, AU -13 focuses on monitoring for 
organizational information that may have been mined or otherwise obtained from data stores and 
is now available as open source information residing on external sites, for example, through social 
networking or social media websites.  
Related Controls :  None.  
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AC-24 ACCESS CONTROL DECISIONS  
Control :  Establish procedures to ensure [ Assignment: organization- defined access control 
decision s] are applied to each access request prior to access enforcement.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Access control decisions (also known as authorization decisions) occur 
when authorization information is applied to specific accesses. In contrast, access enforcement 
occurs when systems enforce access control decisions.  While it is very common to have access 
control decisions and access enforcement implemented by the same entity,  it is not required and it 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 33 is not always an optimal implementation choice. For  some architectures and distributed systems , 
different entities  may perform access control decision s and access  enforcement.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -3. 
 Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACCESS CONTROL DECIS IONS | TRANSMIT ACCESS AUT HORIZATION INFORMATI ON  
Transmit [ Assignment:  organization- defined access authorization information ] using [ Assignment: 
organization- defined security safeguards] to [Assignment: organization- defined systems] that 
enforce access control decisions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  In distributed systems, author ization  processes  and access control 
decision s may occur in separate parts of the systems. In such  instance s, authorization 
information is transmitted securely  so timely access control decisions can be enforced at the 
appropriate locations. To support the access control  decision s, it may be necessary to transmit 
as part of the access authorization information, supporting security attributes. This is because 
in distributed systems, there are various access control decisions that need to be made and 
different  entities (e.g., ser vices) make these decisions in a serial fashion, each requiring some 
security attributes to make the decision s. Protecting access authorization information (i.e., 
access control decisions) ensures that such information cannot be altered , spoofed, or  
otherwise  compromised during transmission.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) ACCESS CONTROL DECIS IONS | NO USER OR PROCESS IDENTITY  
Enforce  access control decisions based on [ Assignment: organization- defined security attributes] 
that do not include the identity of the user or process acting on behalf of the user.  
Supplemental Guidance :  In certain situations, it is important that access control decision s can be 
made without information regarding the identity of the user s issuing the request s. These are 
generally instances where preserving individual privacy is of paramount import ance. In other 
situations, user identification information is simply not needed for access control decision s 
and, especially in the case of distributed systems, transmitting suc h information with  the 
needed degree of assurance may be very expensive or difficult to accomplish.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-162, 800-178. 
AC-25 REFERENCE MONITOR   
 Control :  Implement a reference monitor for [Assignment: organization- defined access control 
policies ] that is tamperproof, al ways invoked, and small enough to be subject to analysis and 
testing, the completeness of which can be assured . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information is represented internally within systems using abstractions 
known as data structures. Internal data structur es can represent different types of entities, both 
active and passive. Active entities, also know n as subjects, are associated with individuals, 
devices, or processes acting on behalf of individuals. Passive entities, also known as objects, are 
typically a ssociated with data structures such as records, buffers, tables, files, inter -process pipes, 
and communications ports.  Reference monitors enforce mandatory access control policies, a type 
of access control that restricts access to objects based on the iden tity of subjects or groups to 
which the subjects belong. The access controls are mandatory because subjects with certain privileges (i.e., access permissions) are restricted from passing those privileges on to any other 
subjects, either directly or indirectly —that is, the system strictly enforces the access control policy 
based on the rule set established by the policy. The tamperproof property of the reference monitor 
prevents adversaries from compromising the functioning of the mechanism. The always invoked property prevents adversaries from bypassing the mechanism and hence violating the security 
policy. The smallness property helps to ensure the completeness in th e analysis and testing of the 
mechanism to detect weaknesses or deficiencies (i.e., latent f laws) that would prevent the 
enforcement of the security policy.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 34 Related Controls :  AC -3, AC -16, SC -3, SC -11, SC -39, SI -13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 35 3.2   AWARENESS AND TRA INING  
Quick link to Awareness a nd Training summary table  
AT-1 AWARENESS AND TRAINING POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A security and privacy awareness and training  policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose,  scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
1.2. Procedures to fa cilitate the imple mentation of the security and privacy awareness and 
training policy and the associated security and privacy awareness and training  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
security  and privacy awareness and training  policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current security and privacy awareness and training:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure t hat the security and privacy awareness and training  procedures implement the 
security and privacy awareness and training  policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the awareness and 
training policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the AT 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in estab lishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable  federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely, or can be 
represen ted by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular info rmation systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restat ing controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing  policy and procedures . or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Speci al Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-50, 800-100. 
AT-2 SECURITY  AWARENESS TRAINING  
Control :  Provide basic security and privacy awareness training to system users (including 
managers, senior executives, and contractors) : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 36 a. As part of initial training for new users ; 
b. When required by system changes;  and 
c. [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] thereafter.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s determine the appropriate content of security and privacy 
awareness training and security and privacy awareness techniques based on the specific 
organizational requirements  and the systems to which personnel have authorized access.  The 
content includes a basican  understanding of the need for information security and privacy and 
actions  by users to maintain security and privacy and to respond to suspected security and privacy 
incide nts. The content also addresses an awareness of the need for operations security. Security  
and privacy  awareness techniques can include, for example, displaying posters, offering supplies 
inscribed with security  and privacy reminders , generating email advi sories/notices from senior 
organizational officials, displaying logon screen messages, and conducting information security 
and privacy awareness events.  Awareness training after  the initial training (i.e., described AT -2c) 
is conducted at a minimum frequen cy consistent with applicable laws, directives, regulations, and 
policies. Such training may be satisfied by one or more short ad hoc sessions and include topical 
information on recent attack schemes, changes to organizational security and privacy policies , 
revised security and privacy expectations, and/or a subset of topics from the initial training . 
Related Controls :  AC-17, AC -22, AT -3, AT -4, CP -3, IA -4, IR -2, IR -7, IR -9, PA -2, PL- 4, PM -13, 
PM-22, PS -7, SA -16. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY AWARENESS TRAINING  | PRACTICAL EXERCISES  
Include practical exercises in security awareness training that simulate  actual cyber 
attackssecurity  and privacy incidents . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Practical exercises may include, for example, no -notice social 
engineering att empts to collect information, gain unauthorized access, or simulate the adverse 
impact of opening malicious email attachments or invoking , via spear phishing attacks,  
malicious web links.  Privacy- related practical exercises may include, for example, practi ce 
modules with quizzes on handling personally identifiable information  and affected individuals 
in various scenarios . 
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA -7, CP -4, IR -3. 
(2) AWARENESS TRAINING  | INSIDER THREAT  
Include  awareness training on recognizing and reporting p otential indicators of insider threat . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Potential indicators and possible precursors of insider threat can 
include behaviors such as inordinate, long -term job dissatisfaction, attempts to gain access to 
information not required for j ob performance, unexplained access to financial resources, 
bullying or sexual harassment of fellow employees, workplace violence, and other serious violations of organizational policies, procedures, directives, rules, or practices. Security and 
privacy awareness training includes how to communicate the concerns of employees and 
management regarding potential indicators of insider threat through appropriate 
organizational channels in accordance with established policies and procedures.  
Related Controls :  PM-12. 
(3) AWARENESS TRAINING  | SOCIAL ENGINEERING A ND MINING  
Include  awareness training on recognizing and reporting potential and actual instances of social 
engineering and social mining.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Social engineering is an attempt to trick someone into revealing 
information or taking an action that can be used to attack or compromise systems. Examples 
of social engineering include phishing, pretexting, baiting, quid pro quo, and tailgaiting. 
Social mining is an attempt, in a social setting, to gath er information about the organization 
that may support future attacks.  Security and privacy awareness training includes information 
on how to communicate concerns of employees and management regarding potential and 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 37 actual instances of social engineering an d mining through organizational channels based on 
established policies and procedures.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 50. 
AT-3 ROLE-BASED SECURITY TRAINING  
Control :  Provide role -based security  and privacy training to personnel with assigned security the 
following  roles and responsibilities: [Assignment: organization- defined roles and responsibilities ]: 
a. Before authorizing access to the system or performing assigned duties ; 
b. When required by system changes;  and 
c. [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] thereafter.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s determine the appropriate content of security and privacy 
training based on the assigned roles and responsibilities of individuals and the specific security 
and privacy requirements of organization s and the systems to which per sonnel have authorized 
access . In addition, o rganizations  provide , including security- related technical trainin g specifically 
tailored for assigned duties. Roles that may require role -based security and privacy training 
include, for example, system owners; authorizing officials; system security officers; privacy 
officers;  enterprise architects , information system d evelopers , ; acquisition and procurement 
officials ; systems engineers;  system managers, and software developers;  system , network , and 
database administrators ; personnel conducting configuration management and auditing activities ; 
personnel performing indepe ndent verification and validation activities , security control assessors, 
and other ; auditors; personnel having access to system -level software , adequate security- related 
technical training specifically tailored for their assigned duties. ; security and pri vacy control 
assessors; personnel with contingency planning and incident response duties; personnel with 
privacy management responsibilities; and personnel having access to personally identifiable 
information.  Comprehensive role -based  training addresses ma nagement, operational, and technical 
roles and responsibilities covering physical, personnel, and technical safeguards and 
countermeasures. Such training can include , for example, policies, procedures, tools, methods, and 
artifacts for the security and pri vacy roles defined. O rganization s provide the training necessary 
for individuals to fulfill  their responsibilities related to operations and supply chain security within 
the context of organizational information security and privacy programs. Role -based se curity and 
privacy training also applies to contractors providing services to federal agencies.  
Related Controls :  AC-17, AC -22, AT -2, AT -4, CP -3, IR -2, IR -7, IR -9, IR -10, PL -4, PM- 13, PM -24, 
PS-7, SA-3, SA-11, SA -12, SA -16, SA -19. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY ROLE -BASED  TRAINING | ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROLS  
Provide [Assignment: organization -defined personnel or roles ] with initial and  [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency]  training in the employment and operation of environmental 
controls.  
Supplemental  Guidance :  Environmental controls include, for example, fire suppression and 
detection devices/systems, sprinkler systems, handheld fire extinguishers, fixed fire hoses, smoke detectors, temperature/humidity, heating, ventilation, and air conditioning , and power 
within the facility.  Organizations identify personnel with specific roles and responsibilities 
associated with environmental controls requiring specialized training.  
Related Controls :  PE-1, PE- 11, PE -13, PE -14, PE -15. 
(2) ROLE -BASED  TRAINING | PHYSICA L SECURITY CONTROLS  
Provide [ Assignment: organization -defined personnel or roles ] with initial and [ Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency]  training in the employment and operation of physical security 
controls . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 38 Supplemental Guidance :  Physical securit y controls include, for exa mple, physical access control 
devices, physical intrusion alarms , monitoring/ surveillance equipment , and security guards 
(deployment and operating procedures). Organizations identify personnel with specific roles 
and responsibili ties associated with physical security controls requiring specialized training.  
Related Controls :  PE-2, PE- 3, PE -4. 
(3) ROLE -BASED  TRAINING | PRACTICAL EXERCISES  
The organization includes Include  practical exercises in security and privacy training that reinforce 
training objectives.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Practical exercises for security may include, for example, s ecurity 
training for software developers  that include s simulated cyber -attacks exploiting comm on 
software vulnerabilities  (e.g., buffer overflows ),, or spear/whale phishing attacks targeted at 
senior leaders/executives.  These types of Practical exercises help developers better understand 
the effects of such vulnerabilities and appreciate the need for security coding standards for 
privacy may include , for example,  practice modules with quizzes on handling personally 
identifiable information  in various scenarios,  and processes model scenarios on conducting 
privacy impact assessment s. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) ROLE -BASED  TRAINING | SUSPICIOUS COMMUNICATIONS  AND ANOMALOUS SYSTE M BEHAVIOR  
Provide training to personnel on [ Assignment: organization -defined indicators  of malicious code ] 
to recognize suspicious communications and anomalous behavior in organizational systems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  A well -trained workforce provides another organizational safeguard 
that can be employed as part of a defense -in-depth strategy to protect organizations against 
malicious code coming in to organizations via email or the web applications. P ersonnel are 
trained to look for indications of pote ntially suspicious email for example, receiving an 
unexpected email,  receiving an email containing strange or poor grammar, or receiving an 
email from an unfamiliar sender but who appear s to be from a known sponsor or contractor . 
Personnel are also trained on how to respond to suspicio us email or web communications  
(e.g., not open ing attachments, not click ing on embedded web links, and check ing the source 
of email address es).. For this process to work  effectively, organization al personnel  are trained 
and made aware of what consti tutes suspicious communications. Training personnel on how 
to recognize anomalous behaviors in organizational systems can potentially provide early 
warning for the presence of malicious code. Recognition of such an omalous behavior by 
organizational personnel can supplement automated malicious code detection and protection 
tools and systems employed by organizations.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) ROLE -BASED TRAINING | PERSONALLY IDENTIFIA BLE INFORMATION PROC ESSING  
Provide  personnel who process personally identifiable information  with initial and [ Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency]  training on: 
(a) Organizational authority for collecting personally identifiable information;  
(b) Authorized uses of personally identifiable information; 
(c) Content of System of Records Notices;  
(d) Authorized sharing of personally identifiable information with external  parties; and  
(e) Consequences of unauthorized use or sharing of personally identifiable information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Role -based training on handling personally identifiable information 
helps prevent unauthorized collections or uses of personally identifiable information.  
Related Controls :  PA-3, PA -4. 
References :  NIST Special Publication  800-50. 
AT-4 SECURITY TRAINING RECORDS  
Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 39 a. Document and monitor individual system security and privacy training activities including 
basic security and privacy awareness training and specific role -based  system security and 
privacy training; and  
b. Retain individual training records for [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Documentation for specialized training may be maintained by individual 
supervisors at the option of the organization.  The National Archives and Records Administration 
provides guidance on records retention . 
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, CP -3, IR -2, PM -14, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AT-5 CONTACTS WITH SECURITY GROUPS AND ASSOCIATIO NS 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into PM -15].
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 40 3.3   AUDIT AND ACCOUNT ABILITY  
Quick link to Audit and Accountability summary table  
AU-1 AUDIT AND ACCOUNTABILITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. An audit and accountability policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the audit and accou ntability policy and the 
associated audit and accountability  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignmen t: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
audit and accountability policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current audit and accountability:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the audit and accountability procedures implement the audit and accountability 
policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the audit and 
accountability policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the AU 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in estab lishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable  federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance procedures help provide security and privacy assurance . 
Security  and privacy  program policies a nd procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely, or can be represented by 
multip le policies reflecting the complex nature of certain organizations. The proced ures can be 
established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for particular info rmation 
systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls  are implemented and can be 
directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented 
in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. It is important to 
recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational risk management strategy is 
a key factor in establishing policy and procedures . or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Speci al Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-50, 800-100. 
AU-2 AUDIT EVENTS  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 41 a. Determines Verify  that the information system is capable of auditing can audit  the following 
events event  types : [Assignment: organization- defined auditable events event  types ]; 
b. Coordinate the security audit function with other organizational entities requir ing audit -
related information to enhance mutual support and to help guide the selection of auditable 
events event  types ; 
c. Provide a rationale for why the auditable events event  types  are deemed to be adequate to 
support after -the-fact investigations of security and privacy incidents; and 
d. Determines Specify  that the following events event  types  are to be audited within the 
information  system: [ Assignment: organization- defined audited events (the subset of the 
auditable events defined in AU -2 a.) along with the fr equency of (or situation requiring) 
auditing for each identified event ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  An event is a ny observable occurrence in an organizational system.  
Organizations identify audit events event  types  as those events which are significant and rel evant 
to the security of system s and the environments in which those systems operate to  meet specific 
and ongoing audit needs.  Audit events event types  can include, for example, password changes; 
failed logons or failed accesses related to systems ; security  attribute changes , administrative 
privilege usage, PIV credential usage, or third -party query parameters, or external  credential usage. 
In determi ning the set of auditable events event types , organization s consider  the auditing 
appropriate for each of the s ecurity contro ls to be implemented . To balance auditing requirements 
with other system needs, this control also requires identifying that subset of auditable  events event  
types  that are audited at a given  point in time.  For example, organizations may determ ine that 
systems must have  the capability to log every file access both successful and unsuccessful, but not 
activate that capability  except for specific circumstances due to the potential burden on system 
performance.  
Auditing requirements, including the need for auditable events, may be referenced in other 
security and privacy controls and control enhancements . for example, AC-2(4), AC -3(10), AC -
6(9), AC-16(11), AC-17(1), CM -3.f, CM -5(1), IA -3(3.b), MA -4(1), MP -4(2), PA-4.d, PE- 3, PM -
22, RA -8, SC-7(9), SC-7(15), SI-3(8), SI- 4(22), SI -7(8), and SI -10(1) . Organizations also include 
auditable events event types  that are required by  applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, 
directives, policie s, regulations, standards, and guidelines.  Audit records can be generated at 
various levels  of abstraction , including at the packet level as information traverses the network. 
Selecting the appropriate  level of abstraction auditing  is an important aspect of an audit capability 
and can facilitate the identification of root c auses to problems. Organizations consider in the 
definition of auditable  events event types , the auditing necessary to cover related events event types  
such as the steps in distributed, transaction -based processes (e.g., processes that are distributed 
across  multiple organizations) and actions that occur in service- oriented architectures.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -3, AC -6, AC -7, AC -8, AC -16, AC -17, AU-3, AU -4, AU- 5, AU -6, AU -
7, AU -11, AU -12, CM -3, CM -5, CM -6, IA -3, MA -4, MP -4, PA -4, PE- 3, PM -22, RA -8, SC -7, SC-
18, SI -3, SI -4, SI -7, SI -10, SI -11. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) AUDIT EVENTS | COMPILATION OF AUDI T RECORDS FROM MULTI PLE SOURCES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AU -12]. 
(2) AUDIT EVENTS | SELECTION OF AUDIT EVENTS BY COMPONENT  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AU -12]. 
(3) AUDIT EVENTS | REVIEWS AND UPDATES   
Review and update the audit ed events [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Over time, the events that organizations believe should be audited may 
change. Reviewing and updating the set of audited events periodically is necessary to ensure that the current set is still necessary and sufficient.  
Related Controls :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 42 (4) AUDIT EVENTS | PRIVILEGED FUNCTION S  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -6(9)]. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 92.  
AU-3 CONTENT OF AUDIT RECORDS  
 Control :  The system generates audit records containing information that establishes what type of 
event occurred, when the event o ccurred, where the event occurred, the source of the event, the 
outcome of the event, and the identity of any individuals or subjects associated with the event.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Audit record content  that may be necessary to satisfy the requirement o f 
this control, includes, for example, time stamps, source and destination addresses, user or process 
identifiers, event descriptions, success/fail indications, filenames involved, and access control or flow control rules invoked.  Event outcomes can includ e indicators of event success or failure and 
event -specific results, for example, the security and privacy state of the system after the event 
occurred.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -8, AU -12, AU -14, MA -4, SI -7, SI -11. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONTENT OF AUDIT RECORDS | ADDITIONAL AUDIT INFORMATION   
Generate audit records containing the following additional information: [ Assignment: organization -
defined additional, more detailed information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Implementation of this control enhancement is dependent on system 
functionality to configure audit record content.  Detailed i nformation that organizations may 
consider in audit records includes, for example, full text recording of privileged commands or the individual identities of group account users . Organizations consider limiting the additional 
audit information to only that information explicitly needed for specific audit requirements. This facilitates the use of audit trails and audit logs by not including information that could potentially be misleading or could make it more difficult to locate information of interest.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) CONTENT OF AUDIT RECORDS | CENTRALIZED MANAGEM ENT OF PLANNED AUDIT  RECORD CONTENT   
Provide centralized management and configuration  of the content to be ca ptured in audit records 
generated by [ Assignment: organization- defined system components].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement requires that the content to be captured in 
audit records be configured from a central location (necessitating autom ation).  Organizations 
coordinate the selection of required audit content to support the centralized management and 
configuration capability provided by the system.  
Related Controls :  AU-6, AU -7. 
(3) CONTENT OF AUDIT RECORDS | LIMIT PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFO RMATION ELEMENTS   
Limit personally identifiable information contained in audit records to the  following  elements 
identified in the privacy risk assessment : [Assignment: organization -defined elements] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Limiting personally identifiable information  in audit records when 
such information is not needed for operational purposes helps reduce the level of privacy risk 
created by a system . 
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
AU-4 AUDIT STORAGE CAPACITY  
Control :  Allocate audit record storage capacity in accordance with to accommodate [Assignment: 
organization- defined audit record storage retention  requirements ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s consider the types of auditing to be performed and the audit 
processing requirements when allocating audit storage capacity.  Allocating sufficient audit storage 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 43 capacity reduces the likelihood of such capacity being exceeded and resulting in the p otential loss 
or reduction of auditing capability.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -5, AU -6, AU -7, AU-9, AU -11, AU -12, AU -14, SI-4. 
 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) AUDIT STORAGE CAPACITY | TRANSFER TO ALTERNA TE STORAGE   
Off-load audit records [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] onto a different system or 
media than the system being audited.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Off-loading is a process designed to preserve the confidentiality and 
integrity of  audit records by moving the records from the primary system to a secondary or 
alternate system. It is a common process in systems with limited audit storage  capacity ; the 
audit storage is used only in a transitory fashion until the system can communicate with the 
secondary or alternate system designated  for storing the au dit records , at which point the 
information is transferre d. 
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
AU-5 RESPONSE TO AUDIT PROCESSING FAILURES  
Control : 
a. Alert [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] in the event of an audit 
processing fail ure within [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] ; and 
b. Take the following additional actions: [ Assignment: organization- defined actions to be taken].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization -defined actions include, for example, shutting down the 
syste m; overwriting  oldest  audit records;  and stopping the generation of  audit records Examples of 
audit processing failures include software  and hardware errors ; failures in the audit capturing 
mechanisms ; and audit storage capacity being reached or exceeded. O rganizations may choose to 
define additional actions for different audit processing failures  based on the type  of failure , the 
location  of the failure , the severity  of the failure , or a combination of such factors.  This control 
applies to each audit data s torage repository (i.e., distinct system component where audit records 
are stored), the total audit storage capacity of organizations (i.e., all audit data storage repositories combined) , or both . 
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU-4, AU-7, AU -9, AU -11, AU -12, AU -14, SI -4, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) RESPONSE TO AUDIT PROCESSING FAILURES | AUDIT STORAGE CAPAC ITY  
Provide a warning to [Assignment: organization- defined personnel, roles, and/or locations ] within 
[Assignment: organization- defined time -period ] when al located audit record storage volume 
reaches [Assignme nt: organi zation -defined percentage]  of repository maximum audit record 
storage capacity . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may have multiple audit data storage repositories 
distributed across multip le system components, with each repository having different storage 
volume capacities.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) RESPONSE TO AUDIT PR OCESSING FAILURES | REAL-TIME ALERTS   
Provide an alert  in [Assignment: organization -defined real -time-period]  to [Assignment : 
organization- defined personnel, roles, and/or locations ] when the following audit failure events 
occur: [ Assignment: organization -defined audit failure events requiring real -time alerts].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Alerts provide organizations with urgent message s. Real-time alerts 
provide these messages at information technology speed (i.e., the time from event detection to 
alert occurs  in seconds or less) . 
Related Controls :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 44 (3) RESPONSE TO AUDIT PR OCESSING FAILURES | CONFIGURABLE TRAFFI C VOLUME THRESHOL DS 
Enforce configurable network communications traffic volume thresholds reflecting limits on 
auditing capacity and [ Selection: rejects; delays] network traffic above those thresholds.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations have the capability to reject or delay the processing of 
network communications traffic if auditing such traffic is determined to exceed the storage 
capacity of the system audit function. The rejection or delay response is triggered by the 
established organizational traffic volume thresho lds which can be adjusted based on changes 
to audit storage capacity.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) RESPONSE TO AUDIT PR OCESSING FAILURES | SHUTDOWN ON FAILURE   
Invoke a [Selection: full system shutdown; partial system shutdown; degraded operational mode 
with l imited mission/business functionality  available] in the event of [ Assignment: organization -
defined audit failures ], unless an alternat e audit capability exists.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations determine the types of audit failures that can trigger 
automatic system shutdowns or degraded operations. Because of the importance of ensuring 
mission and business continuity, organizations may determine that the nature of the audit 
failure is not so severe that it warrants a complete shutdown of the system sup porting the core 
organizational missions and business operations. In those instances, partial system shutdowns or operating in a degraded mode with reduced capability may be viable alternatives.  
Related Controls :  AU-15. 
References :  None.   
AU-6 AUDIT REVIEW, ANALYSIS, AND REPORTING  
Control : 
a. Review and analyze system audit records [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] for 
indications of [ Assignment: organization- defined inappropriate or unusual activity ]; 
b. Report findings to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]; and  
c. Adjust the level of audit review, analysis, and reporting within the system when there is a 
change in risk based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, or other 
credible sources of information.  
Supplement al Guidance :  Audit r eview, ana lysis, and reporting covers information security- related 
auditing  performed  by organizations including, for example, auditing that results  from monitoring 
of account usage , remote access, wireless connectivity, mobile device connection, configuration 
settings, system component inventory, use of maintenance tools and nonlocal maintenance, 
physical access, temperature and humidity, equipment delivery and  removal, communications at 
system boundaries , and use of mobile code  or VoIP. Findings can be reported to organizational 
entities that include, for example, the incident response team, help desk, information security 
group/department. If organizations are prohibited from reviewing and analyzing audit information 
or unable to conduct such activities  (e.g., in certain national security applications or systems) ,, the 
review/analysis may be carried out by other organizations granted such authority.  The frequency, 
scope, and/or depth of the audit review, analysis, and reporting may be adjusted to meet 
organizational needs based on new information received.   
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC-3, AC -6, AC -7, AC-17, AU -7, AU-16, CA-7, CM-2, CM -5, CM- 6, 
CM-10, CM -11, IA -2, IA -3, IA -5, IA -8, IR -5, MA-4, MP-4, PE-3, PE -6, RA-5, SC-7, SI-3, SI-4, 
SI-7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | AUTOMATED PROCESS INTEGRATION   
Employ automated mechanisms to integrate audit review, analysis, and reporting processes to 
support organizational processes for investigation and response to suspicious activities.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 45 Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational processes benefiting from integrated audit review, 
analysis, and reporting include, for example, incident response, continuous monitoring, 
contingency planning, and Inspector General audits.  
Related Controls :  PM-7. 
 
(2) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | AUTOMATED SECURITY ALERTS   
[With drawn: Incorporated into SI -4]. 
(3) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | CORRELATE AUDIT REP OSITORIES   
Analyze and correlate audit records across different reposit ories to gain organization- wide 
situational awareness.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization -wide situational awareness includes awareness across all 
three tiers of risk management (i.e., organizational, mission/business process, and system) and supports cr oss-organization awareness.  
Related Controls :  AU-12, IR -4. 
(4) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | CENTRAL REVIEW AND ANALYSIS   
Provide and implement  the capability to centrally review and analyze audit records from multiple 
components within the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms for centralized reviews and analyses include, 
for example, Security Information Management products . 
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -12. 
(5) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | INTEGRATION / SCANNING AND MONITORING CAPABILITIES  
INTEGRATED ANALYSIS OF AUDIT RECORDS  
Integrate analysis of audit records with analysis of [ Selection (one or more): vulnerability scanning 
information; performance data; system monitoring information;  [Assignment: organization- defined 
data/inf ormation collected from other sources]] to further enhance the ability to identify 
inappropriate or unusual activity.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement does not require vulnerability scanning, the 
generation of performance data, or system mo nitor ing. Rather, the enhancement requires that 
the analysis of information being otherwise produced in these areas is integrated with the 
analysis of audit information. Security Event  and Information Management S ystem tools  can 
facilitate audit record agg regation /consolidation from multiple system components as well as 
audit re cord correlation and analysis. The use of standardized audit record analysis scripts 
developed by organization s (with localized script adjustments, as necessary) provides more 
cost-effective approach es for analyzing audit  record information collected. The correlation of 
audit record information with vulnerability scanning information is important in determining 
the veracity of vulnerability scans and correlating attack detection event s with  scanning 
results.  Correlation with performance data can help uncover denial of service attacks or  
cyber other types of  attacks resulting in unauthorized use of resources.  Correlation with system 
monitoring information can assist in uncovering attacks  and in better relating audit 
information to operational situations.  
Related Controls :  AU-12, IR -4. 
(6) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH PH YSICAL MONITORING   
Correlate information from audit records with information obtained from monit oring physical 
access to further enhance the ability to identify suspicious, inappropriate, unusual, or malevolent 
activity.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The correlation  of physical audit information and audit logs from 
systems may assist organizations in ident ifying examples of suspicious behavior or su pporting 
evidence of such behavior. For example, t he correlation of an individual’s  identity  for logical 
access to certain systems with the additional physical security information that the individual 
was present  at the facility when the logica l access occurred, may be useful in investigations.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(7) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | PERMITTED ACTIONS   
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 46 Specif y the permitted actions for each [ Selection (one or more): system process; role; u ser] 
associated with the review, analysis, and reporting of audit information . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations specify p ermitted actions for system processes, roles, 
and/or users associated with the review, analysis , and reporting of audit records th rough 
account management techniques. Specifying permitted actions on audit information is a way 
to enforce the principle of least privilege. Permitted actions are enforced by the system and 
include, for example, read, write, execute, append, and delete.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | FULL TEXT ANALYSIS OF PRIVILEGED COMMAN DS  
Perform  a full text analysis of audited privileged commands  in a physically distinct component or 
subsystem of the system, or other system that is ded icated to that analysis.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement requires a distinct environment for the 
dedicated analysis of audit information related to privileged users without compromising such 
information on the system where the users have e levated privileges including the capability to 
execute privileged commands. Full text analysis refers to analysis that considers the full text 
of privileged command s (i.e., command s and all parameters) as opposed to analysis that 
consider s only the name of  the command. Full text analysis includes , for example, the use of 
pattern matching and heuristics.  
Related Controls :  AU-3, AU -9, AU -11, AU -12. 
(9) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | CORRELATION WITH INFORMATION FROM NONTE CHNICAL 
SOURCES   
Correlate infor mation from nontechnical sources with audit information to enhance organization -
wide situational awareness.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Nontechnical sources include , for example, human resources records 
documenting organiza tional policy violations including, f or example, sexual harassment 
incidents and  improper use of or ganizational information assets . Such information can lead to 
a more directed analytical effort to detect potential malicious insider activity. Due to the sensitive nature of the information ava ilable from nontechnical sources, o rganizations limit 
access to such information to minimize the potential for the inadvertent release of privacy -
related information to individuals that do not have a need to know. Thus, correlation of information from nont echnical sources with audit information generally occurs only when 
individuals are suspected of being involved in a security incident. Organizations obtain legal 
advice prior to initiating such actions.  
Related Controls :  PM-12. 
(10) AUDIT REVIEW , ANALYSIS , AND REPORTING | AUDIT LEVEL ADJUSTM ENT 
The organization a djusts the level of audit review, analysis, and reporting within the information 
system when there is a change in risk based on law enforcement information, intelligence 
information, or other credible s ources of information.  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AU-6]. Supplemental Guidance:    
The frequency, scope, and/or depth of the audit review, analysis, and reporting may be adjusted to 
meet organizational needs based on new information received. References :  NIST Special Publications  800-
86, 800-101. 
AU-7 AUDIT REDUCTION AND REPO RT GENERATION  
 Control :  Provide  and implement an audit reduction and report generation capability  that: 
a. Support s on-demand audit review, analysis, and reporting requirements and after -the-fact 
investigations of security incidents ; and  
b. Does not alter the o riginal content or time ordering of audit records.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Audit reduction is a process that manipulates collected audit information 
and organizes such information in a summary format that is more meaningful to analysts. Audit 
reduction and  report generation capabilities do not always emanate from the same system or from 
the same organizational entities conducting auditing activities. Audit reduction capability can 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 47 include, for example, modern data mining techniques with advanced data filter s to identify 
anomalous behavior in audit records. The report generation capability provided by the system can 
generate customizable reports. Time ordering of audit records can be a significant issue if the 
granularity of the timestamp in the record is ins ufficient.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AU -2, AU -3, AU -4, AU -5, AU-6, AU- 12, AU -16, CM -5, IA -5, IR -4, PM -
12, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) AUDIT REDUCTION AND REPORT GENERATION | AUTOMATIC PROCESSIN G  
Provide and implement  the capability to process audit records  for events of interest based on 
[Assignment: organization- defined audit fields within audit records ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Events of interest can be identified by the content of specific audit 
record fields including, for example, identities of individ uals, event types , event location s, 
event times, event dates, system resource s involved,  Internet Protocol addresses involved, or 
information object s accessed. O rganization s may define audit event criteria to any degree of 
granularity required, for example, location s selectable by general networking location or  
selectable by specific system component . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) AUDIT REDUCTION AND REPORT GENERATION | AUTOMATIC SORT AND SEARCH  
Provide  and implement  the capability to sort and search audit reco rds for events of interest based 
on the content of [ Assignment:  organization- defined  audit fields  within audit records ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Sorting and searching of audit records may be based upon  the contents 
of audit record fields , for example, dat e and time of events; user identifier s; Internet Protocol 
addresses involved  in the event; type of event ; or event success  or failure.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
AU-8 TIME STAMPS  
 Control : 
a. Use internal system clocks to generate time stamps for audit records ; and 
b. Record time stamps for audit records that  can be mapped to Coordinated Universal Time or 
Greenwich Mean Time and  meets [Assignment: organization- defined granularity of time 
measurement ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Time stamps generated by the system include date and time.  Time is 
commonly expressed in Coordinated Universal Time  (UTC ), a modern continuation of Greenwich 
Mean Time (GMT) , or local time with an offset from UTC. Granularity of time measurements 
refers to the degree of synchro nization between system clocks and reference clocks, for example, 
clocks synchronizing within hundreds of milliseconds or tens of milliseconds. O rganization s may 
define different time granularities for different system components.  Time service can also be 
critical to other security capabilities such as access control and identification and authentication, 
depending on the nature of the mechanisms used to support those capabilities.   
Related Controls :  AU-3, AU -12, AU -14. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TIME STAMPS | SYNCHRONIZATION WITH  AUTHORITATIVE TIME SOURCE  
(a) Compare the internal system clocks [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency]  with 
[Assignment: organization- defined authoritative time source] ; and 
(b) Synchronize the internal system clocks to the authoritativ e time source when the time 
difference is greater than [ Assignment: organization -defined time-period] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement provides uniformity of time stamps for 
systems with multiple system clocks and systems connected over a network.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 48 Related Controls :  None.  
(2) TIME STAMPS | SECONDARY AUTHORITA TIVE TIME SOURCE  
(a) Identif y a secondary authoritative time source that is located in a different geographic region 
than the primary authoritative time source; and  
(b) Synchronize the internal sys tem clocks to the secondary authoritative time source if the 
primary authoritative time source is unavailable.  
Supplemental Guidance :  It may be necessary to employ geolocation information to determine 
that the secondary authoritative time source is in a d ifferent geographic region.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
AU-9 PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION  
 Control :  Protect audit information and audit tools from unauthorized access, modification, and 
deletion.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Audit informatio n includes all information, for example,  audit records, 
audit settings, audit reports , and personally identifiable information,  needed to successfully audit 
system activity.  This control focuses on technical or automated protection of audit information. 
Physical protection of audit information is addressed by media protection controls and physical 
and environmental protection controls.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -6, AU -6, AU -11, AU -14, AU -15, MP -2, MP -4, PE- 2, PE- 3, PE -6, SC -
8, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PROTECTION OF AUDIT I NFORMATION | HARDWARE WRITE -ONCE MEDIA  
Write  audit trails to  hardware- enforced, write- once media.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies  to the initial generation of audit 
trails  (i.e., the collection of audit records that represents  the audit information to be used for 
detection, analysis, and reporting  purposes) and to the backup of those audit trails. The 
enhancement does not apply to the initial generation of audit records prior to being written to 
an audit trail. W rite-once, read -many (WORM) media includes, for example, Compact Disk -
Recordable ( CD-R) and Digital Video Disk -Recordable ( DVD- R). In contrast, the use of 
switchable write -protection media such as on tape cartridges  or Universal Serial Bus ( USB ) 
drive s results in write -protected, but not write -once, media.  
Related Controls :  AU-4, AU -5. 
(2) PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION | AUDIT BACKUP STORE  ON SEPARATE PHYSICAL SYSTEMS OR  
COMPONENTS  
 backs up Store  audit records [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ] ontoin a repository 
that is part of a physically different system or system component than the system  or component  
being audited.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement Storing audit information in a repository 
separate from the audited system or sy stem component helps to ensure that a compromise of 
the information system being audited does not also result in a compromise of the audit 
records.  It may also enable management of audit records as an organization -wide activity. 
This control enhancement ap plies to initial generation as well as backup or long -term storage 
of audit information.  
Related Controls :  AU-4, AU -5. 
(3) PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION   
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect the integrity of audit inform ation and audit tools.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Cryptographic mechanism s used for protecting  the integrity  of audit 
information include, for example,  signed hash functions  using asymmetric cryptography  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 49 enabling distribution of the public key to verify the h ash information while maintaining the 
confidentiality of the secret key used to generate the hash . 
Related Controls :  AU-10, SC -12, SC -13. 
(4) PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION | ACCESS BY SUBSET OF  PRIVILEGED USERS  
Authorize access to management of audit funct ionality to only  [Assignment: organization- defined 
subset of privileged users] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Individuals with privileged access to a system and who are also the 
subject of an audit by that system, may affect the reliability of audit information by inhibit ing 
audit activities or modifying audit records. This control enhancement requires  that privileged 
access be further defined between audit -related priv ileges and other privileges, thus  limiting 
the users with audit -related privileges.  
Related Controls :  AC-5. 
(5) PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION | DUAL AUTHORIZATION  
Enforce dual authorization for [ Selection (one or more): movement ; deletion ] of [Assignment: 
organization- defined audit information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose diffe rent selection options for different 
types of audit information. Dual authorization mechanisms require the approval of two 
authorized individuals to  execute. Dual authorization may also be known as two -person 
control.  
Related Controls :  AC-3. 
(6) PROTECTION OF  AUDIT INFORMATION | READ ONLY ACCESS  
Authorize read -only access to audit information to [ Assignment: organization -defined subset of 
privileged users].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Restricting privileged user authorizations to read -only helps to limit 
the pote ntial damage to organizations that could be initiated by such users, for example, 
deleting audit records to cover up malicious activity.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(7) PROTECTION OF AUDIT INFORMATION | STORE ON COMPONENT W ITH DIFFERENT OPERAT ING SYSTEM  
Store a udit information  on a component running a different operating system than the system  or 
component  being audited.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement helps reduce the risk of a vulnerability 
specific to an operating system resulting in a comprom ise of the audit records.  
Related controls:   AU -4, AU -5, AU -11, SC -29. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 180-4, 202. 
AU-10 NON -REPUDIATION  
Control :  Protect against an individual (or process acting on behalf of an individual) falsely denying 
having performed [ Assignment: organization- defined actions to be covered by non- repudiation] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Types of individual actions covered by non- repudiation include  creating 
information, sending and receiving  message s, and approving information  (e.g., indicating 
concurrence or signing  a contr act).. Non-repudiation protects individuals against later claims by  
author s of not having authored particular certain  document s; sender s of not having transmitted 
message s; receiver s of not having received message s; and individual signator ies of not  having 
signed documents. Non -repudiation services can be used to determine if information originated 
from a  certain  individual, or if an individual took specific actions, for example, sending an email, 
signing a contract, or approving a procurement reques t, or received specific information. 
Organizations obtain non- repudiation services by employing various techniques or mechanisms 
including, for example, digital signatures  and digital message receipts . 
Related Controls :  AU-9, PM -12, SC -8, SC -12, SC -13, SC -16, SC -17, SC -23. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 50 Control Enhancements : 
(1) NON-REPUDIATION | ASSOCIATION OF IDEN TITIES  
(a) Bind  the identity of the information producer with the information to [Assignment: 
organization- defined strength of binding]; and  
(b) Provide the means for authorized individuals to determine the identity of the producer of the 
information . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement supports audit requirements that provide 
organizational personnel with the means to identify who produced specific information in the 
event of an information transfer. Organizations determine and approve t he strength of the 
binding between the information producer and the information  based on the security categor y 
of the information and relevant risk factors.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, AC -16. 
(2) NON-REPUDIATION | VALIDATE BINDING OF  INFORMATION PRODUCE R IDENTITY  
(a) Validate the binding of the information producer  identity to the information at [ Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency]; and  
(b) Perform [ Assignment: organization -defined actions ] in the eve nt of a validation error.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement prevents the modification of information  
between p roduction and review. The validation of bindings can be achieved, for example, 
using cryptographic checksums.  Organizations determi ne if validations are in response to user 
requests or generated automatically.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4, AC -16. 
(3) NON-REPUDIATION | CHAIN OF CUSTODY  
Maintain reviewer  or releaser identity and credentials within the established chain of custody  for all 
information reviewed or released.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Chain of custody is a process that tracks the movement of evidence 
through its collection, safeguarding, and analysis life cycle by documenting each person who 
handled the evidence, the date and tim e it was collected or transferred, and the purpose for the 
transfer. I f the reviewer is a human or if the review function is automated but separate from 
the release/transfer function, the system associates the identity of the reviewer of the 
information to  be released with the informat ion and the information label. In the case of 
human reviews, this control enhancement provides organizational officials the means to 
identify who reviewed  and released the information. In the case of automated reviews, this 
control enhancement ensure s that only approved review functions are employed.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, AC -16. 
(4) NON-REPUDIATION | VALIDATE BINDING OF  INFORMATION REVIEWE R IDENTITY  
(a) Validate the binding of the information reviewer  identity  to the information at the transfer  or 
release point s prior to release or transfer between [ Assignment: organization -defined security 
domains ]; and  
(b) Perform [ Assignment: organization -defined actions ] in the event of a validation error.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhance ment prevents the modification of information 
between review and transfer/release.  The validation of bindings can be achieved, for example, 
using cryptographic checksums.  Organizations determine validations are in response to user 
requests or generated aut omatically.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, AC -16. 
(5) NON-REPUDIATION | DIGITAL SIGNATURES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -13]. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 180-4, 186-4, 202; NIST Special Publication 800-177. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 51 AU-11 AUDIT RECORD RETENTION  
Control :  Retain audit records for [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period consistent with 
records retention policy ] to provide support for  after-the-fact investigations of security and 
privacy incidents and to meet regulatory and organizational information retention requirements.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s retain audit records until it is determined that they are no 
longer needed for administrative, legal, audit, or other operational purposes.  This includes, for 
example, retention and availability of audit records relative to Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
requests, subpoena s, and law enforcement actions. Organizations develop s tandard categori es of 
audit records relative to such types of actions and standard response processes for each type of 
action . The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) General Records Schedules 
provide federal policy on record retention.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -4, AU -5, AU -6, AU -9, AU -14, MP -6, RA -5, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) AUDIT RECORD RETENTI ON | LONG -TERM RETRIEVAL CAPAB ILITY  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined measures] to ensure that long- term audit records 
generated by th e system can be retrieved.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement helps to ensure that, from a technological 
perspective, audit records requiring long -term storage  (on the order of years)  can be accessed 
and read  when needed . Measures employed by  organizations to help facilitate the retrieval of 
audit records include, for example, converting records to newer formats, retaining equipment 
capable of reading the records, and retaining necessary documentation to help organizational 
personnel understand how to interpret the records.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None . 
AU-12 AUDIT GENERATION  
Control : 
a. Provide audit record generation capability for the auditable events defined event  types  in AU -2 
a. at [Assignment: organization- defined system compon ents]; 
b. Allow [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] to select which auditable 
events event  types  are to be audited by specific components of the system; and  
c. Generate audit records for the events event  types  defined in AU -2 d. with the content in AU -3. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Audit records can be generated from many different system components. 
The list of audited events event  types  is the set of events event  types  for which audits are to be 
generated. These events event  types  are typically a subse t of all events event  types  for which the 
system can generate  audit records . 
Related Controls :  AC-6, AC -17, AU-2, AU- 3, AU-4, AU -5, AU-6, AU -7, AU -14, CM -5, MA -4, 
MP-4, PM -12 SC -18, SI -3, SI -4, SI -7, SI -10. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) AUDIT GENERATION | SYSTEM -WIDE AND TIME-CORRELATED AUDIT TRA IL  
Compile audit records from [ Assignment: organization -defined system components] into a system -
wide (logical or physical) audit trail that is time -correlated to within [ Assignment: organization -
defined level of tolerance for the relationship between time stamps of individual records in the 
audit trail ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Audit trails are  time-correlated if the time stamp s in the individual 
audit records can be reliably related to the time stamp s in other audit recor ds to achieve a time 
ordering of the records within organizational  tolerances . 
Related Controls :  AU-8. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 52 (2) AUDIT GENERATION | STANDARDIZED FORMAT S  
Produce a system -wide (logical or physical) audit trail composed of audit records in a standardized 
format.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Audit information that is normalized to common standard s promotes 
interoperability and exchange of such information between dissimilar de vices and systems. 
This facilitates  production of  event information that can be more readily analy zed and 
correlated.  Standard formats for audit records include, for example, s ystem log records and 
audit records compliant with Common Event Expression s (CEE). If logging mechanisms 
within system s do not conform to standardized format s, system s may conver t individual audit 
records into standardized format s when compiling system -wide audit trails . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) AUDIT GENERATION | CHANGES BY AUTHORIZ ED INDIVIDUALS  
Provide  and implement  the capability  for [Assignment: organization- defined individuals or roles]  to 
change  the auditing to be performed on [ Assignment: organization- defined system components ] 
based on [ Assignment: organization -defined selectable event criteria]  within [ Assignment: 
organization- defined time thresholds ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement enables organization s to extend or limit 
auditing as necessary to meet organizational requirements . Auditing that is limited to conserve 
system resources may be extended to address certain threat situation s. In addition, audi ting 
may be limited to a specific set of event  types  to facilitate audit reduction, analysis, and 
reporting. Organizations can establish time thresholds in which audit actions are changed, for 
example, near real -time, within minutes, or within hours.  
Relat ed Controls :  AC-3. 
(4) AUDIT GENERATION | QUERY PARAMETER AUDI TS OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATIO N 
Provide and implement the capability for auditing the parameters of user query events for data sets 
containing personally identifiable information.  
Supplem ental Guidance :  Query parameters are explicit criteria that a user or automated s ystem 
submits to a system to retrieve data. Auditing of query parameters within systems for da tasets 
that contain personally identifiable information augments an organization 's ability to track and 
understand the access, usage, or sharing of personally identifiable information by authorized 
personnel.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
AU-13 MONITORING FOR INFORMATION DISCLOSURE  
Control :  Monitor [Assignment: organization -defined open source information and/or information 
sites] [Assignment: organization- defined frequency ] for evidence of unauthorized disclosure of 
organizational information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Open source information includes, for example, social  networking sites.  
Related Controls :  AC-22, PE -3, PM -12, RA -5, SC -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MONITORING FOR INFOR MATION DISCLOSURE | USE OF AUTOMATED TO OLS  
Employ automated mechanisms to determine if organizational information has been disclosed in 
an una uthorized manner.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms can include, for example, automated scripts to 
monitor new posts on selected websites, and commercial services providing notifications and 
alerts to organizations.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) MONI TORING FOR INFORMATI ON DISCLOSURE | REVIEW OF MONITORED  SITES  
Review the open source information sites being monitored [ Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency].  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 53 Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None . 
AU-14 SESSION AUD IT 
 Control :  Provide and implement  the capability for authorized users to  select a user session to 
capture/record or view/hear.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Session audits include, for example, monitoring keystrokes, tracking 
websites visited, and recording in formation and/or file transfers. Session auditing activities are 
developed, integrated, and used in consultation with legal counsel in accordance with applicable 
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations , standard, and guidelines . 
Related C ontrols :  AC-3, AU -2, AU -3, AU -4, AU -5, AU -8, AU- 9, AU- 11, AU -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SESSION AUDIT | SYSTEM START -UP  
Initiate session audits automatically  at system start -up. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SESSION AUDIT | CAPTURE  AND RECORD AND LOG CONTENT  
Provide and implement  the capability for authorized users to c apture , record , and log content 
related to a user session . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SESSION AUDIT | REMOTE VIEWING AND LISTENING  
Provi de and implement  the capability for authorized users to r emotely view  and hear content 
related to an established user session in real time . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC-17. 
References :  None.  
AU-15 ALTERNATE AUDIT CAPABILITY  
Control :  Provide an alternate audit capability in the event of a failure in primary audit capability 
that provides implements  [Assignment: organization- defined alternate audit functionality ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Since an alternate audit capability may be a sho rt-term protection employed 
until the failure in the primary auditing capability is corrected, organizations may determine that 
the alternate audit capability need only provide a subset of the primary audit functionality t hat is 
impacted by the failure.  
Related Controls :  AU-5, AU -9. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
AU-16 CROSS -ORGANIZATIONAL AUDITING  
 Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined methods ] for coordinating [ Assignment: 
organization- defined audit information] among external organizations when audit information is 
transmitted across organizational boundaries.  
Supplemental Guidance :  When organizations use systems and/or services of external o rganizations, 
the auditing capability necessitates  a coordinated approach across or ganizations. For example, 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 54 maintaining the identity of individuals that requested particular specific  services across 
organizational boundaries may often be very difficult, and doing so may prove to have significant 
performance and privacy ramifications. The refore, it is often the case that cross -organizational 
auditing (e.g., the type of auditing capability provided by service -oriented architectures) si mply 
captures the identity of individual s issuing request s at the initial system, and  subsequent systems 
record that the request s emanated from authorized individuals . 
Related Controls :  AU-6, AU -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CROSS -ORGANIZATIONAL AUDIT ING | IDENTITY PRESERVATI ON  
Require that the identity of individuals is preserved in cross -organizational audit tra ils. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies when there is a need to be able to 
trace actions that are performed across organizational boundaries to a specific individual.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, IA -4, IA -5, IA -8. 
(2) CROSS -ORGANIZATIONAL AUD ITING | SHARING OF AUDIT IN FORMATION   
Provide cross- organizational audit information to [ Assignment: organization -defined 
organizations ] based on [ Assignment: organization -defined cross- organizational sharing 
agreements].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Because of  the distributed nature of the audit information, cross -
organization sharing of audit information may be essential for effective analysis of the 
auditing being performed.  For example, the audit records of one organization may not provide 
sufficient informa tion to determine the appropriate or inappropriate use of organizational 
information resources by individuals in other organizations . In some instances , only the home 
organization s of individuals have  the appropriate knowledge to make such determination s, 
thus requiring the sharing of audit information among organizations.  
Related Controls :  IR-4, SI -4. 
References :  None.
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 55 3.4   ASSESSMENT , AUTHORIZATION , AND MONITORING  
Quick link to Assessment , Authorization, and Monitoring  summ ary table  
CA-1 ASSESSMENT , AUTHORIZATION SECURITY ASSESSMENT AND AUTHORIZATION , AND 
MONITORING  POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A security and privacy assessment , authorization , and monitoring policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations , policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
1.2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the security and privacy assessment , 
authorization , and monitoring  policy and the associated security and privacy assessment , 
authorization , and monitoring  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
security  and privacy assessment , authorization , and monitoring policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current security and privacy assessment , authorization , and  
monitoring : 
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the security and privacy assessment , authorization , and monitoring  procedures 
implement the security and privacy asse ssment , authorization , and monitoring  policy and 
controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of security and privacy 
assessment, authorization, and monitoring policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the CA 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicabl e federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may ma ke the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely, or can be 
represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
procedures can be establis hed for security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  Procedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at t he personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 56 References :  NIST Speci al Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-50, 800-100, 800-122; NIST 
Interagency Report 8062 . 
CA-2 SECURITY ASSESSMENTS  
 Control : 
a. Develop a security and privacy assessment plan that describes the scope of the asse ssment 
including:  
1. Security and privacy controls and control enhancements under assessment;  
2. Assessment procedures to be used to determine security  control effectiveness; and  
3. Assessment environment, assessment team, and assessment roles and responsibilities;  
b. Ensure the assessment plan is reviewed and approved by the authorizing official or designated 
representative prior to conducting the assessment;  
b.c. Assess the security and privacy controls  in the system  and its environment of operation  
[Assignment: organizat ion-defined frequency ] to determine the extent to which the controls 
are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with 
respect to meeting established security and privacy requirements;  
c.d. Produce a security and privacy a ssessment report that document the results of the assessment ; 
and 
d.e. Provide the results of the security and privacy control assessment to [ Assignment: 
organization- defined  individuals or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s assess  security  and priva cy controls in  organizational  
system s and the environments in which those systems operate as part of  initial and ongoing 
authorization s; FISMA annual assessments; continuous monitoring; and system development life 
cycle activities . Assessments ensure that organizations meet information security is built into 
organizational information systems ;and privacy requirements ; identify weaknesses and 
deficiencies early in the development process; provide essential information needed to make risk -
based decisions as p art of authorization  processes; and ensure compliance to vulnerability 
mitigation procedures . Organizations conduct assessments on the implemented controls from 
Chapter Three as documented in System security plans and Information Security Program privacy  
plans. Organizations can use other types of assessment  activities such as vulnerability scanning  
and system monitoring to maintain the security  and privacy posture of  system s during the entire  
life cycle . Assessment reports document assessment results in suf ficient detail as deemed 
necessary by organizations, to determine the accuracy and compl eteness of the report s and 
whether the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and producing the desired 
outcome with respect to meeting security req uirements . The FISMA requirement for assessing 
security control s at least annually  does not require  additional assessment activities  to those 
activities  already in place in organizational security authorization process es. Security requirements . 
Assessment r esults are provided to the individuals or roles appropriate for the types of assessments 
being conducted. For example, assessments conducted in support of authorization decisions are 
provided to authorizing officials , senior agency officials for privacy, and/ or authorizing official 
designated representatives.  
To satisfy annual assessment requirement s, organizations can use assessment results from the 
following sources : initial or ongoing system authorization s; continuous monitoring ; or system 
development li fe cycle activities. Organizations ensure that assessment  results are current , relevant 
to the determination of control effectiveness, and obtained with the appropriate level of assessor 
independence. Existing control assessment results can be reused to th e extent that the results  are 
still valid and can also be supplemented with additional assessments as needed. After  the initial 
authorization s and in accordance with OMB policy , organizations assess controls during 
continuous monitoring. Organizations also  establish the frequency for ongoing assessments in 
accordance with organizational continuous monitoring strategies. Information Assurance 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 57 Vulnerability Alerts provide useful examples of vulnerability mitigation procedures. External  
audits  including, for e xample, audits by external entities such as regulatory agencies , are outside 
the scope of this control.  
Related Controls :  AC-20, CA -5, CA-6, CA -7, PM -9, RA -5, SA -11, SA-12, SC -38, SI -3, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY ASSESSMENTS | INDEPENDENT ASSESSORS  
Employ independent assessor s or assessment team s to conduct security and privacy control  
assessments.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Independent assessor s or assessment team s are individual s or group s 
conducting impartial assessment s of systems. Impartiality  implies that assessors are free from 
any perceived or actual conflicts of interest regarding  development, operation, sustainment, or 
management of the system s under assessment or the determination of control effectiveness. 
To achieve impartiality, assesso rs should not create a mutual or conflicting interest with the 
organizations where the assessments are being conducted; assess their own work; act as 
management or employees of the organizations they are serving; or place themselves in 
positions of advocac y for the organizations acquiring their services. Independent  assessment s 
can be obtained from  elements within organization s or can be contracted to public or private 
sector entities outside of organizations. A uthorizing official s determine the required level of 
independence based on the security categori es of system s and/or the risk to organizational 
operations , organizational assets, or individuals. A uthorizing officia ls also determine if the 
level of assessor independence provides  sufficient assurance  that the results are sound and can 
be used to make credibl e, risk -based decisions. This includes determining whether contracted 
assessment services  have sufficient independence, for example, when  system owner s are not 
directly involved in contracting process es or cannot unduly influence the impartiality  of 
assessor s conducting assessment s. In special situations, for example , When organization s that 
own the system s are small or  organizational structure s require that assessment s are conducted  
by individuals tha t are in the developmental, operational, or management chain of system 
owner s, independence in assessment process es can be achieved by ensuring that assessment 
results are carefully reviewed and analyzed by independent team s of experts to validate the 
comp leteness, accuracy, integrity, and reliability of the results.  Organizations recognize that 
assessments performed for purposes other than direct support to authorization decisions are, 
when performed by assessors with sufficient independence, more likely t o be useable for such 
decisions, thereby reducing the need to repeat assessments.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) ASSESSMENTS | SPECIALIZED ASSESSM ENTS  
Include as part of security  and privacy  control assessments, [ Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency], [Sel ection: announced; unannounced], [Selection (one or more): in-depth monitoring; 
vulnerability scanning; malicious user testing; insider threat assessment; performance/  and load 
testing; [Assignment: organization -defined other forms of  security assessment ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can employ  information system monitoring, conduct 
specialized assessments including, for example, verification, validation, insider threat 
assessments, malicious user testing , system monitoring,  and other forms of te sting  (e.g., 
verification and validation)  to. Such assessments  can improve readiness by exercising 
organizational capabilities and indicating current performance levels as a means of focusing 
actions to improve  security  and privacy . Organizations conduct a ssessment activities these 
types of specialized assessments  in accordance with applicable laws, Executive Orders, 
directives, policie s, regulations, standards , and guidelines . Authorizing officials approve the 
assessment methods in coordination with the org anization al risk executive function. 
Organizations can incorporate vulnerabilities  uncovered during assessments into vulnerability 
remediation processes.  
Related Controls :  PE-3, SI-2. 
(3) ASSESSMENTS | EXTERNAL ORGANIZATI ONS 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 58 Accept the results of an assessmen tsecurity and privacy control assessment s of [Assignment: 
organization- defined  information system ] performed by [ Assignment: organization- defined external 
organization] when the assessment meets [ Assignment: organization -defined requirements ]. 
Supplemental  Guidance :  Organizations may often rely on security and privacy control 
assessments of specific information organizational systems by other (external) organizations. 
Using such assessments and reusing existing assessment evidence can significantly decreas e 
the time and resources required  for assessment s by limiting the amount of independent 
assessment activities that organization s need to perform. The factors that organization s 
consider in determining whether to accept assessment  results from external orga nizations can 
vary. Determinations for accepting assessment results can be based on Such factors include , 
for example, past assessment experiences one the organization has had with another the 
organization , conducting the assessment;  the reputation that organization s have the assessing 
organization  has with regard to assessments ,; the level of detail of supporting assessment 
documentation evidence  provided, or ; and the mandate s imposed upon organizations  by 
federal legislation applicable laws, Executive Orders, d irectives , policie s, or 
directives regulations, standards, and guidelines . 
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800- 37, 800-39, 800-53A, 800-115, 
800-122, 800-137; NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
CA-3 SYSTEM INTERCONNECTIONS 
 Control : 
a. Authorize connections from the system  to othe r systems using  Interconnection Security 
Agreements;  
b. Document , for each interconnection,  the interface characteristics, security and privacy 
requirements , and the nature of the information communicated ; and 
c. Review and update Interconnection Security Agreem ents [ Assignment: organization -defined 
frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to dedicated  connections between two or more separate 
system s (i.e., system interconnections)  and does not apply to transitory, user -controlled 
connections such as email and website browsing . Organization s consider the risks that may be 
introduced when systems are  connected to other systems with different security and privacy 
requirements and security controls, bothincluding systems  within organization sthe same 
organization  and systems  external to the organization. Authorizing officials determine the risk 
associated with system connections and the appropriate controls employed.  If interconnecting 
systems have the same authorizing official, organizations do not nee d to develop Interconnection 
Security Agreements. Instead, those organizations can describe the interface characteristics 
between the interconnecting systems in their respective security and privacy plans. If 
interconnecting systems have different authoriz ing officials within the same organization, the 
organizations can develop Interconnection Security Agreements or they can describe the interface 
characteristics between the systems in the security  and privacy  plans for the respective systems. 
Organizations  may also incorporate Interconnection Security Agreement  information into formal 
contract s, especially  for interconnection s established between  federal agencies and nonfederal 
(i.e., private sector)  organizations . Risk considerations also include syst ems s haring the same 
networks. For certain technologies (e.g., space, unmanned aerial vehicles, As part of the risk 
assessment of connecting to external systems, organizations consider the number  and medical 
devices), there may be specialized types of transitive  connections in place during preoperational 
testing. that exist when establishing  such connections  may require I nterconnection Security 
Agreements and be subject to addition al security controls.  . 
Related Controls :  AC-20, AU -16, IA -3, PL -2, RA -3, SA -9, SC-7, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM INTERCONNECTI ONS | UNCLASSIFIED NATION AL SECURITY SYSTEM C ONNECTIONS  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 59 Prohibit the direct connection of an [ Assignment: organization -defined unclassified, national 
security system ] to an external network  without the use  of [Assignment : organization- defined 
boundary protection device ]. 
Supplemental Guidance:   Organizations typically do not have control over external network s 
including the Internet. A pproved boundary protection device s including, for example, routers 
and firewall s. mediate communication s and information flows between unclassified national 
security system s and external network s. This control enhancement is required for 
organizations processing, storing, or transmitting Controlled Unclassified Information (CU I). 
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) SYSTEM INTERCONNECTI ONS | CLASSIFIED NATIONAL  SECURITY SYSTEM CON NECTIONS  
Prohibit the direct connection of a classified, national security system to an external network  
without the use of [ Assignment : organization- defined boundary protection device] . 
Supplemental Guidance:   Organizations typically do not have control over external network s 
including the Internet. A pproved boundary protection device s including, for example, routers 
and firewall s, mediate  communication s and info rmation flows  betwe en classified national 
security systems and external networks. In addition, approved boundary protection device s 
(typically managed interface/cross -domain system s) provide information flow enforcement 
from system s to external networks.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) SYSTEM INTERCONNECTI ONS | UNCLASSIFIED NON -NATIONAL SECURITY SY STEM CONNECTIONS  
Prohibit the direct connection of an [ Assignment: organization -defined unclassified, non -national 
security system ] to an external network without the us e of [Assignment; organization -defined 
boundary protection device ]. 
Supplemental Guidance:   Organizations typically do not have control over external network s 
including the Internet. A pproved boundary protection device s including, for example, routers 
and firewall s mediate communication s and information flows between unclassified non -
national security system s and external network s. This control enhancement is required for 
organizations processing, storing, or transmitting Controlled Unclassified Information  (CUI).  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) SYSTEM INTERCONNECTI ONS | CONNECTIONS TO PUBL IC NETWORKS  
Prohibit the direct connection of an [ Assignment: organization -defined system ] to a public 
network . 
Supplemental Guidance:   A public network is any network  accessible to the general public 
including, for example, the Internet and organizational extranets with public access.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) SYSTEM INTERCONNECTI ONS | RESTRICTIONS ON EXT ERNAL SYSTEM CONNECT IONS 
The organization employs [ Selection: allow -all, deny -by-exception; Emp loy a deny -all, permit -by-
exception ] policy for allowing [ Assignment: organization- defined systems] to connect to external 
systems.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Organizations can constrain system connectivity to external domains 
(e.g., websites ) by employing one of two policies with regard to such connectivity: (i) allow -
all, deny by exception , also known as blacklisting  (the weaker of the two policies); or (ii) 
deny-all, allow by exception , alsoa deny -all, permit -by-exception policy  known as 
whitelisting  (the stronger of the two policies) . For either policy ,. Organizations determine 
what exceptions, if any, are acceptable.  This control : CM  enhancement is applied to a system 
that is connected to another system. Alternatively, control enhancement SC -7(5) applies to 
any type of network communications . 
Related Controls :  SC-7. 
(6) SYSTEM INTERCONNECTI ONS | SECONDARY AND TERTIA RY CONNECTIONS  
(a) Identify secondary and tertiary connections to the interconnected systems ; and 
(b) Take measures to ensure that connect ions are severed when security and privacy controls on 
identified secondary and tertiary systems cannot be verified or validated.    
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 60 Supplemental Guidance:   For certain critical systems and applications including, for example, 
high-value assets, it may be n ecessary to identify second and third level connections to the 
interconnected systems. The transparency of the protection measures in place in secondary 
and tertiary systems connected directly or indirectly to organizational systems is essential in 
underst anding the actual security and privacy risks resulting from those interconnections. 
Organizational  systems can inherit risk from secondary and tertiary systems through those 
connections and make the organizational systems more susceptible to threats, hazar ds, and 
adverse consequences.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800- 47. 
CA-4 SECURITY CERTIFICATION  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CA -2]. 
CA-5 PLAN OF ACTION AND MILESTONES  
 Control : 
a. Develop  a plan of action and milestones for the system to document the planned remedial 
actions of the organizatio n to correct weaknesses or deficiencies noted during the assessment 
of the controls and to reduce or eliminate known vulnerabilities in the system; and  
b. Update  existing plan of action and milestones [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ] 
based on the findings from control assessments, impact analyses, and continuous monitoring 
activities . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Plans of action and milestones are required  document s in authorization 
packages  and are subject to federal reporting requirements established by OMB.  
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA -7, PM-4, PM -9, RA-7, SI-2, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PLAN OF ACTION AND M ILESTONES | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR ACCURACY AND  CURRENCY  
Employ automated mechanisms to ensure that the plan of action and milestones for the s ystem is 
accurate, up to date, and readily available.  
Supplemental Guidance:   None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 37. 
CA-6 SECURI TY AUTHORIZATION  
Control : 
a. Assign a senior -level executive or manager as the authorizing official for the system  and for 
any common controls inherited by the  system ; 
b. Ensure that the authorizing official, before commencing operations : 
1. Updates Authorizes  the security authorization system for processing ; and  
2. Authorizes the common controls inherited by the system; and  
c. Update the authorization s [Assignment: organization- defined frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Security  Authorizations are  official management deci sions, conveyed 
through authorization decision document s, by senior organizational official s or executive s (i.e., 
authorizing officials ) to authorize operation of system s (including the controls inherited by those 
systems)  and to explicitly accept the risk  to organizational operations  and assets, individuals, other 
organizations, and the Nation based on the implementation of agreed -upon security and privacy 
controls . Authorizing officials provide  budgetary oversight for organizational systems or assume 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 61 responsibility  for the mission  and business operations supported by th ose systems . The s ecurity 
authorization  process is an inherently a federal responsibility and therefore, authorizing officials 
must be federal empl oyees. Through the security authorization pr ocess, Authorizing officials are 
responsible and accountable for security and privacy risks associated with the operation and use of 
organizational systems. Accordingly, authorizingNonfederal organizations may have similar 
processes to authorize their syst ems and senior  officials are in positions with level s of authority 
commensurate with understanding and accepting such information security -related risks.  OMB 
policy requires that assume the authorization role and associated responsibilities. Organizations 
conduct ongoing authorizations of systems by implementing continuous monitoring programs . 
Robust continuous monitoring programs can satisfy  three -year reauthorization requirement s, 
soreduce the need for  separate reauthorization process es are not necessary . Through the 
employment of comprehensive continuous monitoring process es, critical information contained in 
authorization package s including the security  and privacy  plans, security and privacy assessment 
report s, and plan s of action and milestones , is upd ated on an ongoing basis . This provides  
authorizing officials, system owner s, and common control providers  with an up -to-date status of 
the security and privacy state of their systems , controls,  and environments of operation. To reduce 
the administrative cost of reauthorization, authorizing officials  use the results of continuous 
monitoring process es to the maximum extent possible as the basis for rendering reauthorization 
decision s. 
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA -7, PM -9, PM -10, SA -10, SI -12.   
Control Enhanc ements : 
(1) AUTHORIZATION | JOINT AUTHORIZATION  — SAME ORGANIZATION  
Employ a joint authorization process for the system that includes multiple authorizing officials 
from the same organization conducting the authorization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Assigning mult iple authorizing officials from the same organization to 
serve as co -authorizing officials for the system, increases the level of independence in the 
risk-based decision making process for security and privacy. It also implements the concepts 
of separation  of duties and dual authorization as applied to the system authorization process.  
This enhancement is most relevant for interconnected systems, shared systems, and systems 
with one or more information owners.  
Related Controls :  AC-6. 
(2) AUTHORIZATION | JOINT AUTHORIZATION — DIFFERENT ORGANIZATIONS  
Employ a joint authorization process for the system that includes multiple authorizing officials with 
at least one authorizing official from an organization external to the organization conducting the 
authorization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Assigning multiple authorizing officials, at least one of which comes 
from an external organization, to serve as co -authorizing officials for the system, increases the 
level of independence in the risk -based decision making process  for security and privacy. It 
also implements the concepts of separation of duties and dual authorization and as applied to 
the system authorization process. Employing authorizing officials from external organizations 
to supplement the authorization official from the organization owning or hosting the system 
may be necessary when those organizations have a vested interest or equities in the outcome 
of the authorization decision. This situation may occur with interconnected systems, shared 
systems, and syste ms with one or more information owners. Accordingly, the authorizing 
officials from the external organizations may be considered key stakeholders of the system 
undergoing authorization.  
Related Controls :  AC -6. 
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-37, 800-137; NIST Supplemental Guidance on 
Ongoing Authorization . 
CA-7 CONTINUOUS MONITORING   
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 62  Control :  Develop a security and privacy  continuous monitoring strategy and implement security 
and privacy  continuous monitoring programs that i nclude:  
a. Establishing the following security and privacy metrics to be monitored: [Assignment: 
organization- defined metrics ]; 
b. Establishing [ Assignment: organization- defined freq uencies ] for monitoring and 
[Assignment: organization -defined frequencies ] for a ssessments supporting such 
monitoringongoing assessment of security and privacy control effectiveness ; 
c. Ongoing security  and privacy  control assessments in accordance with the organizational 
continuous monitoring strategy;  
d. Ongoing security  and privacy  statu s monitoring of organization -defined metrics in 
accordan ce with the organizational continuous monitoring strategy ; 
e. Correlation and analysis of security - and privacy- related information generated by  security 
and privacy control  assessments and monitoring;  
f. Response actions to address results of the analysis of security - and privacy- related 
information; and  
g. Reporting the s ecurity  and privacy status  of the organization and organizational system s to 
[Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or roles ] [Assignme nt: organization- defined 
frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Continuous monitoring programs facilitate ongoing awareness of threats, 
vulnerabilities, and information security  and privacy  to support organizational risk management 
decisions. The ter ms contin uous and ongoing imply  that organizations assess /analyze security and 
privacy controls and associated  risks at a frequency sufficient  to support organizational risk-based 
decisions. The results of continuous monitoring programs generate appropriate risk re sponse 
actions by organizations.  When monitoring the effectiveness of controls that have been grouped 
into capabilities, a root-cause analysis may be needed to determine the specific control that has 
failed.  Continuous monitoring program s also allow organi zation s to maintain t he security 
authorizations of system s and common controls over time in highly dynamic environment s of 
operation with changing mission and business needs, threats, vulnerabilities, and technologies . 
Having access to security - and privac y-related information on a continuing basis through reports 
and dashboards gives organizational officials the capability to make more effective and  timely risk 
management decisions, including ongoing authorization decisions. Automation supports more 
freque nt updates to hardware, software , and firmware inventories, authorization package s, and 
other system information. Effectiveness is further enhanced when continuous monitoring outputs 
are formatted to provide information that is specific, measurable, action able, relevant, and timely.  
Continuous monitoring activities are scaled in accordance with the security categories of systems.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -6, AU -6, CA-2, CA -5, CA -6, CM-3, CM-4, CM -6, CM -11, IA -5, PE-
6, PL -2, PM -4, PM -6, PM- 9, PM- 10, PM -12, PM-14, PM-32, RA-3, RA-5, RA-7, SA-11, SC -5, 
SC-38, SI -3, SI -4, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONTINUOUS MONITORIN G | INDEPENDENT ASSESSM ENT  
Employ independent  assessor s or assessment team s with [Assignment: organization- defined level 
of independence ] to monitor the  security and privacy controls in the system on an ongoing basis.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s can maximize the value of control assessment s during 
the continuous monitoring process by requiring  that assessments be conducted by  assessor s 
with appropriate levels of independence. The level of assessor independence required is  based 
on organizational  continuous monitoring strategies. Assessor independence provides a degree 
of impartiality to the monitoring process.  To achieve such impartial ity, assessors should not 
create a mutual or conflicting interest with the organizations where the assessments are being conducted; assess their own work; act as management or employees of the organizations they 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 63 are serving; or place themselves in advocacy  positions for the organizations acquiring their 
services.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) CONTINUOUS MONITORIN G | TYPES OF ASSESSMENT S  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CA -2]. 
(3) CONTINUOUS MONITORIN G | TREND ANALYSES  
Employ trend analyses to determine if security and privacy control implementations, the frequency 
of continuous monitoring activities, and the types of activities used in the continuous monitoring 
process need to be modified based on empirical data.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Trend analyses can include, for  example, examining recent threat 
information regarding the types of threat events that have occurred within the organization or 
the federal government, success rates of certain types of attacks, emerging vulnerabilities in 
information specific  technologies , evolving social engineering techniques, results from 
multiple control assessments, the effectiveness of configuration settings, and findings from 
Inspectors General or auditors.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) CONTINUOUS MONITOR ING | RISK MONITORING  
Ensure risk monitoring is an integral part of the continuous monitoring strategy that includes the 
following:  
(a) Effectiveness monitoring;  
(b) Compliance monitoring; and  
(c) Change monitoring.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Effectiveness monitoring determines the ongoing effectivenes s of 
implemented risk response measures. Compliance monitoring verifies that the required risk 
respon se measures are implemented. It also verifies that security and privacy requirements are 
satisfied. Change monitoring identifies changes to organizational systems and environments 
of operation that may affect security and privacy risk.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 37, 800-39, 800-53A, 800-115, 800-122, 800-137; 
NIST Interagency Re ports 8011, 8062 . 
CA-8 PENETRATION TESTING  
 Control :  Conduct penetration  testing [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ] on 
[Assignment: organization -defined systems or system components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Penetration testing is a specialized type of assessment conducted on 
systems or individual system components t o identify vulnerabilities that could be exploited by 
adversaries. Penetration testing goes beyond automated vulnerability scanning and is most 
effectively conducted by penetration testing agents and teams with demonstrable skills and 
experience that, depending on the scope of the penetration testing, include technical expertise in 
network, operating system, and/or application level security. Penetration  testing can be used to 
either validate vulnerabilities or determine the degree of penetration resistance  of systems to 
adversaries within specified constraints. Such constraints include, for example, time, resources, and skills. Penetration testing attempts to duplicate the actions of adversaries in carrying out 
hostile cyber attacks against organizations and provides a more in -depth analysis of security-  and 
privacy- related weaknesses or deficiencies. Organizations can use the results of vulnerability 
analyses to support penetration testing activities. Penetration testing can be conducted on the 
hardware, so ftware, or firmware components of a system and  can exercise both physical and 
technical controls . A standard method for penetration testing includes, for example,  pretest 
analysis based on full knowledge of the target system; pretest identification of pote ntial 
vulnerabilities based on pretest analysis; and testing designed to determine exploitability of 
identified vulnerabilities. All parties agree to the rules of engagement before commencement of 
penetration testing scenarios. Organizations correlate the rules of engagement for the penetration 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 64 tests with the tools, techniques, and procedures that are anticipated to be employed by adv ersaries 
carrying out attacks. R isk assessment s guide the decision s on the level of independence required 
for personnel  conducting penetration testing.  
Related Controls :  SA-11, SA -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PENETRATION TESTING | INDEPENDENT PENETRATION AGENT OR TEAM  
Employ an independent penetration agent or penetration team to perform penetration testing on 
the system  or syste m components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Independent penetration agents or teams  are individual s or group s who 
conduct impartial penetration testing of  organizational systems. Impartiality implies that 
penetration agents or teams  are free from any perceived o r actual conflicts of interest with 
respect to the development, operation, or management of the system s that are the targets of 
the penetration testing. Supplemental guidance for CA -2(1) provides additional information 
on independent assessments that can b e applied to penetration testing.  
Related Controls :  CA-2. 
(2) PENETRATION TESTING | RED TEAM EXERCISES  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined red team exercises] to simulate attempts by 
adversaries to compromise organizational systems in accordance with [ Assignment: organization-
defined applicable rules of engagement.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Red team exercises extend the objectives of penetration testing by 
examining the security and privacy posture of organizations and their ability to implement 
effective cy ber defenses. Red team exercises reflect simulated attempts by adversaries to 
compromise organizational missions and business functions and provide a comprehensive 
assessment of the security and privacy state of systems and organizations. Simulated attempts 
by adversaries to compromise missions and business functions and the systems that support 
those missions  and functions may include technology -focused attacks (e.g.,based  attacks and 
social engineering -based attacks . Technology -based attacks include interactions with 
hardware, software, or fir mware components and/or mission and business processes.  Social 
engineering -based attacks include interactions via email, telephone, shoulder sur fing, or 
personal conversations. Red team exercises are most effectively conducted by penetration 
testing agents and teams with knowledge of and experience with current adversarial tactics, 
techniques, procedures, and tools.  While penetration testing may be primarily  laboratory -
based testing, organizations can use red team exer cises to provide more comprehensive 
assessments that reflect real -world conditions. Red team exercises can be used to improve 
security and privacy awareness and training and to assess  levels of security  control 
effectiveness.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) PENET RATION TESTING | FACILITY PENETRATION  TESTING   
Employ a penetration testing process that includes [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] 
[Selection: announced; unannounced]  attempts to bypass or circumvent controls associated with 
physical access poi nts to the facility.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CA-2, PE- 3. 
References :  None.  
CA-9 INTERNAL SYSTEM CONNECTIONS  
 Control : 
a. Authorize internal connection s of [ Assignment: organization- defined system components  or 
classes of components ] to the system; and  
b. Document , for each internal connection,  the interface characteristics, security and privacy 
requirements , and the nature of the information communicated.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 65 Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to connections between organizational systems and 
separate constituent system components. These intra- system connections, include, for example, 
system connections with mobile devices, notebook  computers, desktop computers , workstations , 
printers, copiers, facsimile machines, scanners, sensors,  and servers. Instead of authorizing each 
individual internal system connection, organizations can authorize internal connections for a class 
of system components with common characteristics and/or configurations. This can include, for 
example, all digital printers, scanners, and copiers with a specified processing, transmission, and 
storage capability or all smart phones with a specific baseline configuration.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4, AC -18, AC -19, CM -2, IA -3, SC-7, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INTER NAL SYSTEM CONNECTIO NS | COMPLIANCE CHECKS  
Perform security  and privacy  compliance checks on constituent system components prior to the 
establishment of the internal connection.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Compliance checks may include, for example, verificat ion of the 
relevant baseline configuration.  
Related Controls :  CM-6. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 124; NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 66 3.5   CONFIGURATION MAN AGEMENT  
Quick link to Configuration Management summary table  
CM-1 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES   
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A configuration management policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consi stent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the configuration management policy and 
the associated configuration management  controls;  
b. Designa te an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage 
configuration management  policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current configuration management:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assig nment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the configuration management  procedures implement the configuration 
management  policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the configuration 
management policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the CM 
family. The risk management strategy is an important fac tor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  progr am policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can b e 
represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
procedures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe h ow policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize t hat restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy  and procedures . policy or 
procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12.  
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800-12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
CM-2 BASELINE CONFIGURATION  
Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 67 a. Develop, document, and maintain under configuration control, a current baseline 
configuration of the system ; and  
b. Review and update the baseline configuration of the system:  
1. [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]; 
2. When required due to [ Assignment organization- defined circumstances ]; and  
3. When system component s are installed or upgraded.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control establishes baseline configuration s for systems  and system  
components including communications and connectivity- related aspects of systems. B aseline 
configuration s are documented, formally r eviewed and agreed -upon sets of specifications for  
system s or configuration item s within those system s. Baseline configuration s serve as a basis for 
future builds, releases, and/or changes  to systems . Baseline configuration s include  information 
about syste m components  (e.g., standard  software packages installed  on workstation s, notebook 
computers, server s, network component s, or mobile device s; current version numbers and patch 
information on operating system s and applications ; and configuration settings/pa rameters ),, 
network topology, and the logical placement of  those  component s within the system architecture. 
Maintaining baseline configuration s requires  creating new baselines as organizational systems 
change over time. B aseline configuration s of system s reflect  the current enterprise architectu re. 
Related Controls :  AC-19, AU -6, CA -9, CM -1, CM-3, CM-5, CM-6, CM -8, CM -9, CP -9, CP -10, 
CP-12, PL -8, PM -5, SA -10, SC -18. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | REVIEWS AND UPDATES  The organization reviews and updates t he 
baseline configuration of the information system : 
(2)(1)  [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ];When required due to [ Assignment 
organization- defined circumstances ]; and  
a. As an integral part of information system component installations  and u pgrades . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Related control: CM -5. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into  CM-2]. 
(3)(2)  BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR ACCURACY AND CURRENCY  
Employ automated mechanisms to maintain an up- to-date, complete, accurate, and readily 
avail able baseline configuration of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms that help organizations maintain consistent 
baseline configurations for systems include, for example, hardware and software inventory 
tools, configuration management to ols, and network management tools. Such tools can be 
deployed and/or allocated as common controls, at the system level, or at the operating system  
or component level including, for example, on workstations, servers, notebook computers, 
network components, or mobile devices. Tools can be used , for example,  to track version 
numbers on operating system s, applications , types of software installed , and current patch 
levels. This control enhancement can be satisfied by the implementation of CM -8(2) for 
organizati ons that choose to combine system component inventory and baseline configuration 
activities.  
Related Controls :  CM-7, IA -3, RA -5. 
(4)(3)  BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | RETENTION OF PREVIO US CONFIGURATIONS  
Retain [Assignment: organization -defined previous versions of baseline configurations of the 
system ] to support rollback.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Retaining previous versions of baseline configurations to support 
rollback may include, for example, hardware, software, firmware, configuration files, and configuration reco rds. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(5)(4)  BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | UNAUTHORIZED SOFTWA RE  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 68 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into  CM-7(4)]. 
(6)(5)  BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | AUTHORIZED SOFTWARE  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into  CM-7(5)]. 
(7)(6)  BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | DEVELOPMENT AND TEST ENVIRO NMENTS  
Maintain a baseline configuration for system development and test environments that is managed 
separately from the operational baseline configuration.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Establishing separate baseline configurations for development, testing, 
and operational environments helps protect systems from unplanned/unexpected events 
related to development and testing activities. Separate baseline configurations allow 
organizations to apply the configuration management that is most appropriate for each t ype of 
configuration. For example, management of operational configurations typically emphasizes 
the need for stability, while management of development/test configurations requires greater 
flexibility. Configurations in the test environment mirror the con figurations in the operational 
environment to the extent practicable so that the results of the testing are representative of the 
proposed changes to the operational systems. This control enhancement requires separate 
configurations but not necessarily sep arate physical environments.  
Related Controls :  CM-4, SC -3, SC -7. 
(8)(7)  BASELINE CONFIGURATI ON | CONFIGURE SYSTEMS  AND COMPONENTS , OR DEVICES  FOR HIGH -RISK 
AREAS  
(a) Issue [Assignment: organization -defined systems or system components] with [ Assignment: 
organizatio n-defined configurations ] to individuals traveling to locations that the organization 
deems to be of significant risk; and  
(b) Appl y [Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] to the components  when the 
individuals return from travel . 
Supplemental Guidance :  When it is known that systems or system components , or devices (e.g., 
notebook  computers, mobile devices)  will be in  high- risk area s, additional security controls 
may be implemented to counter the greater increased  threat in such areas  coupled wi th the lack 
of physical security  relative to organizational- controlled areas. . For example, o rganizational 
policies a nd procedures organizations can take specific actions  for notebook computers  used 
by individuals departi ng on and returning from travel . The se actions can  include, for example, 
determining which locations are of concern, defining required configurations for the devices, 
ensuring that the devices are configured as intended before travel is initiated, and applying 
specific safeguards  to the devi cecomponent  after travel is completed.  Specially configured 
notebook computers  include, for example, computers with sanitized hard drives, limited 
applications, and additional hardening (e.g., more stringent configuration settings.  Specified 
safeguards  applied to mobile devices upon return from travel include, for example , examining 
the device for signs of physical tampering ; and purging and reimaging the hard disk drive.  
Protecting information residing on mobile devices is covered i n the media protection f amily.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 124, 800-128. 
CM-3 CONFIGURATION CHANGE CONTROL  
 Control : 
a. Determine the types of changes to the system that are configuration -controlled;  
b. Review proposed configuration -controlled changes to the system  and approve or disapprove 
such changes with explicit co nsideration for security impact analyses ; 
c. Document configuration change decisions associated with the system;  
d. Implement approved configuration -controlled changes to the system;  
e. Retain records of configuration -controlled  changes to the system  for [Assignmen t: 
organization- defined time -period] ; 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 69 f. Audits Monitor  and review  activities associated with configuration -controlled  changes to the 
system; and  
g. Coordinate and provide oversight for configuration change control activities through 
[Assignment: organization -defined configuration change control element ] that convenes 
[Selection (one or more):  [Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; [Assignment: 
organization- defined configuration change conditions ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Configuration change control s for organizational system s involve the 
systematic proposal, justification, implementation, test ing, review, and disposition of changes to 
the system s, includi ng system upgrades and modifications. Configuration change control includes 
changes to baseline config urations for components  and configuration items  of system s; changes to 
configuration settings for information technology component  products  (e.g., operating systems, 
applications, firewalls, routers , and mobile devices ),; unscheduled or unauthorized  changes ; and 
changes to remediate vulnerabilities. Configuration change control elements can include such 
entities as committees or boards. T ypical  process es for managing configuration changes to 
information systems include, for example, Configuration Control Boa rds or Change Advisory 
Boards  that review and approve proposed changes to system s. For new development  information  
systems or systems undergoing major upgrades, organizations consider including representatives 
from development organizations on the Configur ation Control Boards  or Change Advisory 
Boards.  Auditing of changes includes  activities  before and after change s are made to 
organizational system s and the auditing activities req uired to implement such changes.  
Related Controls :  CA-7, CM -2, CM-4, CM -5, CM-6, CM-9, CM- 11, IA -3, MA -2, PE- 16, SA -10, 
SA-19, SC -28, SC -34, SC -37, SI-2, SI-3, SI -4, SI -7, SI -10. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONFIGURATION CHANGE  CONTROL | AUTOMATED DOCUMENTA TION, NOTIFICATION , AND PROHIBITION OF 
CHANGES  
Employ automated mechanisms to:  
(a) Document proposed changes to the system;  
(b) Notify [Assignment: organized- defined approval authorities ] of proposed changes to the 
system and request change approval ; 
(c) Highlight proposed changes to the system that have not been approved or disapproved by 
[Assign ment: organization- defined time -period ]; 
(d) Prohibit  change s to the system until designated approvals are received;  
(e) Document all changes to the system ; and  
(f) Notify [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel ] when approved changes to the system 
are completed.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) CONFIGURATION CHANGE  CONTROL | TESTING , VALIDATION , AND DOCUMENTATION O F CHANGES  
Test, validate, and document changes to the system before fully implementing the changes on the 
operational system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Changes to systems include modifications to hardware, software, or 
firmware components and configuration settings defined in CM- 6. Organization s ensure  that 
testing does not interfere with system operations. I ndividual s or group s condu cting tests 
understand organizational security and privacy policies and procedures, system security  and 
privacy  policies and procedures, and the health, safety, and environmental risk s associated 
with specific facilities or processes. Operational system s may need to be taken off -line, or 
replicated to the extent feasible, before testing can be conducted. If system s must be taken off -
line for testing, the tests are scheduled to occur during planned sys tem outages whenever 
possible. If the testing cannot  be conduct ed on operational  system s, organization s empl oy 
compensating controls (e.g., testing on replicated system s).. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) CONFIGURATION CHANGE  CONTROL | AUTOMATED CHANGE IM PLEMENTATION  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 70 Employ automated mechanisms to  implement changes to t he current system baseline and deploy 
the updated baseline across the installed base.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) CONFIGURATION CHANGE  CONTROL | SECURITY REPRESENTATIVE  
Require an [ Assignment: organization -defined information se curity representative]  to be a member 
of the [ Assignment: organization -defined configuration change control element ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information security representat ives can include, for example, Senior 
Agency Information Security O fficers, system  security officers, or system security managers. 
Representation by personnel with information security expertise is important because changes 
to system configurations can have unintended side effects, some of which may be security -
relevant. Detecting such changes early in the process can help avoid unintended, negative consequences that could ultimately affect the security state of organizational systems. The 
configuration change control element in this control enhancement reflects the change control 
elemen ts defined by organizations in CM -3. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) CONFIGURATION CHANGE  CONTROL | AUTOMATED SECURITY RESPONSE  
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined security responses] automatically if baseline 
configurations are changed in an unauthorize d manner.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Security responses include, for example, halting system processing, 
halting selected system functions, or issuing alerts or notifications to organizational personnel 
when there is an unauthorized modification of a configur ation item.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) CONFIGURATION CHANGE  CONTROL | CRYPTOGRAPHY MANAGE MENT  
Ensure that cryptographic mechanisms used to provide [ Assignment: organization -defined 
security safeguards] are under configuration management . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Regar dless of the cryptographic means  employed  (e.g., public key, 
private key, shared secrets) ,, organization s ensure that there are processes and procedures in 
place to effectively manage those means. For example, if devices use certificates as a bas is for 
identification and authentication,  there needs to be a process in place is implemented  to 
address the expiration of those certificates.  
Related Controls :  SC-12. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 124, 800-128; NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
CM-4 SECURITY AND PRIVACY IMPACT ANALYS ES 
Control :  Analyze changes to the system to determine potential security and privacy impacts  prior to 
change implementation . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational personnel with security or  privacy responsibilities  (e.g., 
Information System Administrators, Information System Security Officers , Information System 
Security Managers , and Information System Security Engineers ) conduct security impact analyses . 
Individuals conducting security impact analyses possess the ne cessary skills and technical 
expertise to analyze the changes to systems and the associated security or privacy ramifications. 
Security  and privacy  impact analys es include, for example, reviewing security and privacy plans, 
policies, and procedures  to unde rstand security and privacy control  requirements ; reviewing 
system design documentation to understand control implementation and how specific changes 
might affect the controls ; and determining how potential changes to a system create new risks to 
the priva cy of individuals and the ability of implemented controls to mitigate those risks.  Impact 
analys es may also include assessment s of risk to better understand the impact of the changes and 
to determine if additional security or privacy controls are required . 
Related Controls :  CA-7, CM -3, CM-8, CM -9, MA -2, RA -5, SA -5, SA -10, SI-2. 
Control Enhancements : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 71 (1) SECURITY AND PRIVACY IMPACT ANALYSE S | SEPARATE TEST ENVIR ONMENTS  
Analyze changes to the system  in a separate test environment before implementation  in an 
operational environment, looking for security and privacy impacts due to flaws, weaknesses, 
incompatibility, or intentional malice.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Separate test environment in this context means an environment that is 
physically  or logically isolated  and distinct from the operational environ ment. The separation 
is sufficient to ensure that activities in the test environment do not impact activities in the 
operational environment, and information in the operational environment is not inadvertently 
transmitted  to the test environment.  Separate environments can be achieved by physical or 
logical means. If physically separate test environments are not used, organizations determine 
the strength of mechanism required when implementing logical separation.  
Related Controls :  SA-11, SC -7. 
(2) SECURITY AND PRIVACY  IMPACT ANALYSE S | VERIFICATION OF SECU RITY AND PRIVACY FUNCTIONS  
Check the security and privacy functions after system changes , to verify that the functions are 
implemented correctly, operating as intended , and producing the desired outcome with regard to 
meeting the security and privacy requirements for the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Implementation in this context refers to installing changed code in the 
operational system.  
Related Controls :  SA-11, S C-3, SI -6. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 128. 
CM-5 ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE  
Control :  Define, document, approve, and enforce physical and logical access restrictions associated 
with changes to the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Any  changes to the hardware, software, and/or firmware components of  
system s can potentially have significant effects on the o verall security of the systems. Therefore, 
organizations permit only qualified and authorized individuals to access system s for purposes of 
initiating changes, including upgrades and modifications.  Organizations maintain records of access 
to ensur e that configuration change control is implemented  and to support after -the-fact actions 
should organization s discover  any unauthorized cha nges. Access restrictions for change also 
include software libraries. Access restrictions include, for example, physical and logical access 
controls (see AC -3 and PE -3), work flow automation, media libraries, abstract layers ( i.e., changes 
implemented into third -party external  interfaces  rather than directly into system s), and change 
windows ( i.e., changes occur only during specified times , making unauthorized changes easy to 
discover). ). 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC-5, AC-6, CM-9, PE-3, SC-28, SC -34, SC -37, SI -2, SI -10. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | AUTOMATED ACCESS EN FORCEMENT AND AUDITING  
(a) Enforce access restrictions ; and  
(b) Generate audit  records  of the e nforcement actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations log access records associated with applying 
configuration changes  to ensur e that configuration change control is implemented  and to 
support after -the-fact actions should organization s discover  any unauthorized cha nges.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -6, AU -7, AU -12, CM -6, CM -11, SI -12. 
(2) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | REVIEW SYSTEM CHANG ES 
Review system changes [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] and  [Assignment: 
organization- defined circumstances]  to determine whether unauthorized changes have occurred.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Indications that warrant review of system changes and the specific 
circumstances justifying such reviews may be obtained from activities carried out by 
organizations during the configuration change process.  
Related Controls :  AU-6, AU -7, CM -3. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 72 (3) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | SIGNED COMPONENTS  
Prevent the installation of [ Assignment: organization- defined software and firmware components ] 
without verification that the compo nent has been digitally signed using a certificate that is 
recognized and approved by the organization . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Software and  firmware components prevented from installation unless 
signed with recognized and approved certificates include, fo r example, software and firmware 
version updates, patches,  service packs , device drivers, and basic input output system (BIOS) 
updates . Organizations can identify applicable software and firmware components by type, by 
specific items, or a combination of b oth. Digital signatures and organizational verification of 
such signatures, is a method of code authentication.  
Related Controls :  CM-7, SC -13, SI -7. 
(4) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | DUAL AUTHORIZATION  
Enforce  dual authorization  for implementing changes t o [Assignment: organization -defined system 
components  and system -level information ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations employ dual authorization to ensure that any changes to 
selected system components and information cannot occur unless two qualified individual s 
implement  such changes. The two individuals possess sufficient skill s and expertise to 
determine if the proposed changes are correct implementation s of approved change s. Dual 
authorization may also be known as two -person control.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -5, CM -3. 
(5) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | LIMIT PRIVILEGE LIMITATION  FOR  PRODUCTION / OPERATIONAL 
PRIVILEGES AND OPERATION  
(a) Limit privileges to change system components and system -related  information within a 
production or operational environment; and  
(b) Review and reevaluate privileges [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  In many organizations, systems support many missions and business 
functions. Limiting privileges to change system components with respect to opera tional 
systems is necessary because changes to a particular information system component may have 
far-reaching effects on mission and business processes supported by the system  where the 
component resides . The complex, many -to-many relationships between sy stems and 
mission/business processes are in some cases, unknown to developers.  
Related Controls :  AC-2. 
(6) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | LIMIT LIBRARY PRIVI LEGES  
Limit privileges to change software resident within software libraries.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Software libraries include privileged programs.  
Related Controls :  AC-2. 
(7) ACCESS RESTRICTIONS FOR CHANGE | AUTOMATIC IMPLEMENT ATION OF SECURITY SAFEGUARDS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -7]. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 186-4. 
CM-6 CONFIGURATION SETTINGS  
 Control : 
a. Establish and document configuration settings for components  employed within the syste m 
using [ Assignment: organization- defined security configuration checklists common secur e 
configurations ] that reflect  the most restrictive mode consistent with operational 
requirements;  
b. Implement the configuration settings;  
c. Identif y, document, and approve any deviations  from established configuration settings for 
[Assignment: organization -defined system components ] based on [ Assignment: organization-
defined operational requirements ]; and 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 73 d. Monitor and control changes to the configuration settings in accordance with organizational 
policies and procedures.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Configuration settings are the parameters that can be changed in hardware, 
software, or firmware components of the system that affect the security posture or f unctionality of 
the system . Information technology products for which security -related configuration settings can 
be defined include, for example, mainframe  computers , servers  (e.g., database, electronic mail, 
authentication, web, proxy, file, domain name) ,, workstations, input/output devices  (e.g.,  
scanners, copiers, and printers) ,, network components (e.g., firewalls, routers, gateways, voice and 
data switches, wireless access points, network appliances, sensors), devices , operating systems, 
middleware, and applications.  Security -related parameters are those parameters impacting the 
security state of system s including the parameters required to satisfy  other security control 
requirements. Security- related parameters include,  for example , registry settings; account, file , 
directory permission settings; and settings for functions, ports, protocols, services, and remote 
connections. Organizations establish organization -wide configuration settings  and subsequently  
derive specific configuration settings for  system s. The established setti ngs become part of the 
systems configuration baseline.  
Common secure configurations ( also referred to as  security configuration checklists,  lockdown  
and hardening guides, security reference guides, security technical implementation guides) provide 
recogniz ed, standardized, and established benchmarks that stipulate secure configuration settings 
for specific information technology platforms /products and instructions for configuring  those 
system components to meet operational requirements. Common secure config urations  can be 
developed by a variety of organizations including, for example, information technology  product  
developers, manufacturers, vendors, consortia, academia, industry , federal agencies, and other  
organizations  in the public and private sectors.  Implementation of a specific common secure 
configuration may be mandated at the organizational or mission/business process level or may be 
mandated at a higher level including, for example, by a regulatory agency. Common secure 
configurations include the United States Government Configuration Baseline (USGCB)  which 
affects the implementation of CM-6 and other co ntrols such as AC -19 and CM -7. The Security 
Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) and the defined standa rds within the protocol (e.g., 
Common Configurat ion Enumeration)  provide an effective method to uniquely identify, track, and 
control configuration settings . OMB establishes federal policy on configuration requirements for 
federal information systems . 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -19, AU -2, AU- 6, CA -9, CM-2, CM -3, CM-5, CM -7, CM -11, CP -7, 
CP-9, CP -10, IA -3, IA -5, PL- 8, RA -5, SA -4, SA -5, SA -9, SC -18, SC -19, SC -28, SC -43, SI -2, SI-
4, SI-6. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONFIGURATION SETTIN GS | AUTOMATED CENTRAL MANAGEMENT , APPLICATION , AND VERIFICATION  
Employ automa ted mechanisms to centrally manage, apply, and verify configuration settings  for 
[Assignment: organization- defined system components] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  
Related Controls :  CA-7. 
(2) CONFIGURATION SETTIN GS | RESPOND TO UNAUTHOR IZED CHANGES  
Employ [Assign ment: organization- defined security safeguards] to respond to unauthorized 
changes to [ Assignment: organization- defined configuration settings ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Responses to unauthorized changes to configuration settings can 
include, for example, alerting designated organizational personnel, restoring established configuration settings, or in extreme case s, halting affected system processing . 
Related Controls :  IR-4, IR -6, SI -7. 
(3) CONFIGURATION SETTIN GS | UNAUTHORIZED CHANGE  DETECTION  
 [Withdrawn: Inc orporated into SI -7]. 
(4) CONFIGURATION SETTIN GS | CONFORMANCE DEMONST RATION  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM-4]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 74 References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-70, 800-126, 800-128; US Government Configur ation 
Baselines ; National Checklist Repository . 
CM-7 LEAST FUNCTIONALITY  
 Control : 
a. Configure the system to provide only essential capabilities ; and 
b. Prohibit or restrict the use of the following functions, ports, protocols, and/or services: 
[Assignment: organization -defined prohibited or restricted functions, ports, protocols, and/or 
services ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Systems provid e a wide variety of functions and services . Some of the 
functions and services  routinely provided by default, may not be necessary to support essential 
organizational operations (e.g., key missions, functions , or operations.  Additionally, it is 
sometimes convenient to provide multiple services from a single system compon ent, but doing so 
increases risk over limiting the services provided by that single component. Where feasible, 
organizations limit component functionality to a single function per device (e.g., email server s or 
web server s, but not both). component.  Organiz ations review f unctions and services provided by 
systems or individual components of systems, to determine which functions and services are 
candidates for elim ination  (e.g., .Voice Over Internet Protocol , Instant Messaging, auto -execute, and 
file sharing).  Organizations consider disabling unused  or unnecessary physical and logical ports / 
and protocols (e.g., Universal Serial Bus, File Transfer Protocol, and Hyper Text Transfer 
Protocol ) on information system s to prevent unauthorized connection of devices, u nauthorized 
transfer of information, or unauthorized and  tunneling. Organizations employ  network scanning 
tools, intrusion detection and prevention systems, and end -point protection  technologies  such as 
firewalls and host -based intrusion detection systems to identify and prevent the use of prohibited 
functions, protocols, ports, and services.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4, CM -2, CM -5, CM -11, RA-5, SA-4, SA -5, SA -9, SA -15, SC -7, SC -
37. SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) LEAST FUNCTIONALITY | PERIODIC REVIEW  
(a) Review  the system [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ] to identify unnecessary 
and/or nonsecure functions, ports, protocols, and services; and  
(b) Disable [ Assignment: organization- defined functions, ports, protocols, and services within the 
system deemed to  be unnecessary and/or nonsecure ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can either decide the relative security of the function, 
port, protocol, and/or service or base the security decision on the assessment of other entities. 
Bluetooth, FTP, and peer -to-peer networking are examples  of less than secure protocols.  
Related Controls :  AC-18. 
(2) LEAST FUNCTIONALITY | PREVENT PROGRAM EXE CUTION  
Prevent program execution in accordance with [ Selection (one or more): [Assignment: 
organization- defined policies  regardi ng software program usage and restrictions] ; rules 
authorizing the terms and conditions of software program usa ge]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses organizational policies restricting 
software usage as well as the terms and condi tions  imposed by the developer or manufacturer 
including, for example, software licensing  and copyrights. Re strictions include, for example,  
restricting the roles allow ed to approve program execution;  prohibiting auto -execute; program 
blacklisting and whitelisting; or restricting the number of program instances executed at the 
same time.  
Related Controls :  CM-8, PM -5. 
(3) LEAST FUNCTIONALITY | REGISTRATION COMPLI ANCE  
Ensure compliance with [ Assignment: organization -defined registration requirements for 
functio ns, ports, protocols, and services].  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 75 Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations use the registration process to manage, track, and 
provide oversight for systems and implemented function s, ports, protocols, and services . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) LEAST FUNCTIONAL ITY | UNAUTHORIZED SOFTWA RE — BLACKLISTING  
(a) Identify [ Assignment: organization- defined software programs not authorized to execute on 
the system ]; 
(b) Employ  an allow -all, deny -by-exception policy to prohibit the execution of unauthorized 
software programs on t he system; and  
(c) Review and update the list of unauthorized software programs [ Assignment: organization-
defined frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The process used to identify specific software programs or entire 
categories of software programs that are not  authorized to execute on organizational 
information systems is commonly referred to as blacklisting . Organizations can implement 
CM-7(5) instead of this control enhancement if whitelisting (the stronger of the two policies) 
is the preferred approach for r estricting software program execution.  
Related Controls :  CM-6, CM -8, CM -10, PM -5. 
(5) LEAST FUNCTIONALITY | AUTHORIZED SOFTWARE  — WHITELISTING  
(a) Identify [ Assignment: organization- defined software programs authorized to execute on the  
system ]; 
(b) Employ a deny -all, permit -by-exception policy to allow the execution of authorized software  
programs  on the system ; and  
(c) Review and update the list of authorized software programs [ Assignment: organization-
defined frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The process used to iden tify specific software programs or entire 
categories of software programs that are authorized to execute on organizational systems is 
commonly referred to as white listing . To effect comprehensive whitelisting  and increas e the 
strength of protection for  attacks that bypass application level whitelisting, software programs 
may be decomposed into and monitored at multipl e levels of detail. Software program levels 
of detail include, for example, applications, application programming interfaces, application 
modu les, scripts, system processes, system services, kernel actions, registries, drivers, and 
dynamic link libraries. The concept of whitelisting may also be applied to user actions, ports, 
IP addresses, and media access control (MAC) addresses.  Organizations consider verifying 
the integrity of white -listed software programs using, for example, cryptographic checksums, 
digital signatures, or hash functions. Verification of white -listed software can occur either 
prior to execution or at system startup.  
Related C ontrols :  CM-2, CM-6, CM-8, CM-10, PM-5, SA-10, SC -34, SI -7. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 180-4, 186-4, 202; NIST Special Publication 800-167. 
CM-8 SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY  
 Control : 
a. Develop  and document  an inventory of system components that:  
1. Accurately reflects the current system;  
2. Includes all components within  the authorization boundary of the system;  
3. Is at the level o f granularity deemed necessary for tracking and reporting;  and 
4. Includes [ Assignment: organization- defined information deemed necessary to achieve 
effective system component  accountability ]; and  
b. Review and update the system component inventory [ Assignment: organization -defined 
frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  System components are discrete identifiable information technology assets 
that represent a building block of a system and include hardware, software, firmware,  and virtual 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 76 machines. Organizations may  choose to implement centralized system component inventories that 
include components from all organizational systems. In such situations, organizations ensure that 
the resulting inventories include system -specific information required for proper component  
accountability  (e.g., information system association, information system owner). . Information 
necessary for effective accountability of system components include s, for example , hardware 
inventory specifications ; software license information ; software  version numbers,  component 
owner s; version numbers;  and for networked component s or devices , the machine name s and 
network address es. Inventory specifications include, for example, manufacturer; device type; 
model; serial number; and physical location.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM-7, CM -9, CM -10, CM -11, CP -2, CP -9, MA -6, PE- 20, PM -5, PM-29, 
SA-4, SA -5, SI -2. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | UPDATES DURING INSTALLATION  AND REMOVAL   
Update  the inventory of syst em components as an integral part of component installations, 
removals, and system updates.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED MAINTENAN CE  
Employ automated mechanisms to he lp maintain an up- to-date, complete, accurate, and readily 
available inventory of system components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations maintain system inventor ies to the extent feasible . 
Virtual machines, for example, can be difficult to monitor becaus e such machines  are not 
visible to the network when not in use. In such cases, organizations maintain as up -to-date, 
complete, and accurate an inventory as is deemed reasonable.  This control enhancement can 
be satisfied by the implementation of CM -2 (2) fo r organizations that choose to combine 
system component inventory and baseline configuration activities.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED UNAUTHORI ZED COMPONENT DETECT ION 
(a) Employ automated mechanisms [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] to detect the 
presence of unauthorized hardware, software, and firmware components within  the system; 
and 
(b) Take the following actions when unauthorized components are detected: [ Selection (one or 
more): disable network access by such comp onents; isolate the components; notif y 
[Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is applied in addition to the monitoring for 
unauthorized remote connections and  mobile devices. Monitoring for unauthorized system 
components may be accomplished on an ongoing basis or by the periodic scanning of systems for that purpose. Automated mechanisms can be implemented within systems or in other 
separate devices. Isolation can be achieved, for example, by placing unauthorized system 
components in separate domains or subnets or otherwise quarantining such components. This 
type of component isolation is commonly referred to as sandboxing.  
Related Controls :  AC-19, CA -7, RA -5, SI -3, SI -4, SI -7. 
(4) SYSTEM COMPONEN T INVENTORY | ACCOUNTABILITY INFO RMATION  
Includes in the system component inventory  information, a means for identifying by [ Selection 
(one or more): name; position; role ], individuals responsible  and accountable for administering 
those components.  
Supple mental Guidance :  Identifying individuals who are both responsible and accountable for 
administering system components helps to ensure that the assigned components are properly 
administered and organizations can contact those individuals if some action is required,  for 
example, the component is determined to be the source of a breach /compromise ; the 
component needs to be recalled or replaced; or the component needs to be relocated.  
Related Controls :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 77 (5) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | NO DUPLICATE ACCOUNTIN G OF COMPONENTS  
(a) Verify that all components within the authorization boundary of the system are not duplicated 
in other system component inventories ; or 
(a)(b)  If a centralized component inventory is used, verify components are not assigned to 
multiple systems . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses the potential problem of duplicate 
accounting of system components in large or complex interconnected systems.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ASSESSED CONFIGURAT IONS AND APPROVED DEVIATIONS  
Include assessed component configurations and any approved deviations to current deployed 
configurations  in the system component inventory . 
Supplemental Guidance : This control enhancement focuses on configuration settings established 
by orga nization s for system components, the specific components that have been assessed to 
determine compliance with the required configuration settings, and any approved deviations 
from established configuration set tings.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(7) SYSTEM COMPONEN T INVENTORY | CENTRALIZED REPOSIT ORY  
Provide a centralized repository for the inventory of system components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose to implement centralized system component 
inventories that include components from all organizat ional systems. Centralized repositories 
of system component inventories provide opportunities for efficiencies in accounting for 
organizational hardware, software, and firmware assets. Such repositories may also help 
organizations rapidly identify the loca tion and responsible individuals of system components 
that have been compromised, breached, or are otherwise in need of mitigation actions . 
Organizations ensure that the resulting centralized inventories include system -specific 
information required for proper component accountability . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | AUTOMATED LOCATION TRACKING  
Employ automated mechanisms to support tracking of system components by geographic 
location.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The use of automated mechanisms to track the location of system 
components can increase the accuracy of component inventories.  Such capability may also 
help organizations rapidly identify the location and responsible individuals of system 
components that have been compromised, brea ched, or are otherwise in need of mitigation 
actions.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(9) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | ASSIGNMENT OF COMPO NENTS TO SYSTEMS  
(a) Assign  [Assignment: organization- defined acquired system components] to a system ; and  
(b) Receive an acknowledgement from the  system owner [Assignment: organization -defined 
personnel or roles ] of this assignment.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations determine the criteria for or types of system components 
(e.g., microprocessors, motherboards, software, programmable l ogic controllers, and network 
devices) that are subject to this control enhancement.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(10) SYSTEM COMPONENT INVENTORY | DATA ACTION MAPPING   
Develop and document a system map of data actions that process personally identifiable 
informati on. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Data actions are system operations that process personally ident ifiable 
information. Such processing encompasses the full information life cycle which includes 
collection, generation , transformation, use, disclosure, retention, disposal . Creating a system 
map of data actions supports a privacy risk assessment. The development of this map may 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 78 necessitate coordination between the privacy and security programs regarding the covered 
data actions, the system components, and the defini tion of the authorization boundary.  
Related Controls :  PM-30, CM -4. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-3, 800-128; NIST Interagency 
Report 8062 . 
CM-9 CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT PLAN  
 Control :  Develop, document, and implement a configuration management plan for the system that:  
a. Addresses roles,  responsibilities, and configuration management processes and procedures;  
b. Establishes a process  for identifying configuration items throughout the system development 
life cycle and for managing the configuration of the configuration items ; 
c. Defines the conf iguration items for the system  and places the configuration items under 
configuration management ; 
d. Is reviewed and approved by [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]; and 
d.e. Protects the configuration management plan from unauthorized disclosure  and modification .  
Supplemental Guidance :  Configuration management plans  satisf y the requirements in configuration 
management polic ies while being tailored to individual systems. Such plan s define detailed 
processes and procedures for how configuration m anagement is used to support system 
development life cycle activities  at the information system level. . Configuration management 
plans are typically developed during the development and acquisition phase of the system 
development life cycle. The plans describe how to move change s through change management 
process es, how to update configuration settings  and baselines, how  to maintain  system component 
inventor ies, how to control development, test, and operational environments, and  how to develop, 
release, and  update key documents. Organizations can employ templates to help ensure consistent 
and timely development and implementation of configuration management plans. Such templates 
can represent a master configuration management plan for the organization at lar ge with subsets of 
the plan implemented on a system by system basis. C onfiguration management approval process es 
include designation of key management stakeholders  responsible for reviewing and approving 
proposed changes to system s, and personnel that cond uct security impact analys es prior to the 
implementation  of changes to the systems. Configuration i tems are the system items ( components  
(i.e., hardware, software, firmware, and documentation ) to be configuration -managed. As systems 
continue through the system development life cycle, new configuration items may be identified 
and some existing configuration items may no longer need to be under configuration control.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM -3, CM -4, CM -5, CM -8, PL -2, SA-10, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONFIGURATION MANAGEME NT PLAN | ASSIGNMENT OF RESPO NSIBILITY  
Assign responsibility for developing the configuration management process to organizational 
personnel that are not directly involved in system development.  
Supplemental Guidance : In the absence of  dedicated configuration management team s assigned 
within organizations , system developers  may be tasked to develop configuration management 
process es using personnel who are not directly involved in system development or integration.  
This separation of du ties ensures that organizations establish and maintain a sufficient degree 
of independence between the system development and integration processes and configuration management processes to facilitate quality control and more effective oversight.  
Related C ontrols :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 128. 
CM-10 SOFTWARE USAGE RESTRICTIONS  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 79 a. Use software and associated documentation in accordance wit h contract agreements and 
copyright laws;  
b. Track the use of software and associated documentation protected by quantity licenses to 
control copying and distribution; and  
c. Control and document the use of peer -to-peer file sharing technology to ensure that thi s 
capability is not used for the unauthorized distribution, display, performance, or reproduction 
of copyrighted work . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Software license tracking can be accomplished by manual methods (e.g., 
simple spreadsheets) or automated methods (e.g., specialized tracking applications)  depending on 
organizational needs.  
Related Controls :  AC-17, AU -6, CM -7, CM -8, SC -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SOFTWARE USAGE RESTR ICTIONS | OPEN SOURCE SOFTWAR E  
Establish the following restrictions on the use of open  source software: [ Assignment: 
organization- defined restrictions].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Open source software refers to software that is available in source code 
form. Certain software rights normally reserved for copyright holders are routinely provided  
under software license agreements that permit individuals to study, change, and improve the 
software. From a security perspective, the major advantage of open source software is that it 
provides organizations with the ability to examine the source code. H owever, there are also 
various licensing issues associated with open source software including, for example, the constraints on derivative use of such software.  
Related Controls :  SI-7. 
References :  None.  
CM-11 USER -INSTALLED SOFTWARE  
 Control : 
a. Establish [ Assignment: organization- defined policies ] governing the installation  of software 
by users ; 
b. Enforce software installation policies through  the following methods: [Assignment: 
organization- defined methods ]; and  
c. Monitor policy compliance at [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  If provided the necessary privileges, users have th e ability to install 
software in organizational systems.  To maintain control over the types of software installed, 
organization s identif y permitted  and prohibited actions regarding software installation. Permitted 
software installations may include, for example, updates and security patches to existing software 
and downloading applications from organization- approved “app stores.” Prohibited software 
insta llations may include, for example,  software with unknown or suspect pedigrees  or software 
that organizations consider potentially malicious.  The policies organizations select governing user -
installed software may be organization -developed or provided by so me external entity. Policy 
enforcement methods include procedural methods  (e.g., periodic examination of user accounts), 
automated methods (e.g., configuration settings implemented on organizational information 
systems), or both. , automated methods, or bot h. 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AU -6, CM-2, CM -3, CM -5, CM -6, CM- 7, CM -8, PL -4, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) USER -INSTALLED SOFTWARE | ALERTS FOR UNAUTHOR IZED INSTALLATIONS  
The information system alert s [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] when the 
unauthorized [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM -8(3)]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 80 (2) SOFTWARE INSTALLATION WITH PR IVILEGED STATUS  
Allow user  installation of software is detected . 
a. USER -INSTALLED SOFTWARE | PROHIBIT INSTALLATI ON WITHOUT PRIVILEGED STATUS  
The information system prohib its user installation of software without only with  explicit privileged 
status . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Privileged status can be obtained, for example, by serving in the role 
of system administrator.  
Related Controls :  AC-5, AC -6. 
References :  None.  
CM-12 INFORMATION LOCATION  
 Control : 
a. Identify the location of [ Assignment: organization- defined information] and the specific 
system components on which the information resides;  
b. Identify and document  the us ers who have access to the system and system components w here 
the information resides; and  
c. Document changes to the location (i.e., system or system components) where the information 
resides.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control  addresses the need to understand where information is being 
processed and stored and is typically applied with respect to Controlled Unclassified Information 
(CUI). The National Archives and Records Administration defines the types of information that 
are categorized as CUI. Information location includes identifying whe re specific informat ion types 
and associated information reside in the system components that compose organizational systems; 
and how information  is being processed so that information f low can be understood and adequate 
protection and policy management provided for such information and system components.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4, AC -6, AC -23, CM -8, PM-29, SC-4, SC -16, SC -28, SI -4, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION LOCATION  | AUTOMATED TOOLS TO SUPPORT INFORMATION LOCATION  
Use automated tools to identify [Assignmen t: organization- defined information by information 
type] on [ Assignment: organization- defined system components ] to ensure adequate security and 
privacy controls are in place to protect organizational information and individual privacy.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement gives organizations the capability to check 
systems and selected system components for types  of information to confirm such information 
resides  on the component and to ensure that the required protection measures are in place for 
that component.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800- 60-1, 800-60-2. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 81 3.6   CONTINGENCY PLANNING  
Quick link to Contingency Planning summary table  
CP-1 CONTINGENCY PLANNING POLICY AND PROCEDURES   
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A contingency planning policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination  among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the contingency planning policy and t he 
associated contingency planning controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
contingency planning policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current contingency planning:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organi zation- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the contingency planning procedures implement the contingency planning policy 
and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for vio lations of the contingency 
planning policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the CP 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable  federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and 
guidance. Security . Comprehensive policy and procedures help provide security  and privacy 
assurance. Security and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may 
make the need for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be 
included as part of the general information security and pri vacy policy for organizations  or 
conversely, or can be represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain 
organizations. The proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy 
programs  and for particular info rmation systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies 
or controls are implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the 
procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or mor e 
separate documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  
organizational risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures .  or 
procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12.  
Control E nhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-34, 800-39, 800-100. 
CP-2 CONTINGENCY PLAN  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 82 a. Develop a contingency plan for the system that:  
1. Identifies essential missions and business functions and associated contingency 
requirements;  
2. Provides recovery objectives,  restoration priorities, and metrics;  
3. Addresses contingency roles, responsibilities, assigned individuals with contact information;  
4. Addresses maintaining essential missions and business functions despite a  system 
disruption, compromise, or failure;  
5. Addres ses eventual, full system restoration without deterioration of the security 
safeguards and privacy controls  originally planned and implemented; and  
6. Is reviewed and approved by [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]; 
b. Distributes copies of the contingency plan to [ Assignment: organization- defined key 
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements ]; 
c. Coordinates contingency planning activities with incident handling activities;  
d. Reviews the contingency plan fo r the system [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ]; 
e. Updates  the contingency plan to address changes to the organization, system, or environment 
of operation and problems encountered during contingency plan implementation, execution, 
or testing;  
f. Communicates contingency plan changes to [ Assignment: organization- defined key 
contingency personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements ]; and  
g. Protects the contingency plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification . 
Supplemental  Guidance :  Contingency planning for systems is part of an overall organizational 
program for achieving continuity of operations for mission/business functions. Cont ingency 
planning addresses system restoration and implem entation of alternative mission or business 
processes when systems are compromised or breached . The effectiveness of contingency planning 
is maximized by considering such planning t hroughout the phases of the system development life 
cycle. Performing contingency planning on hardware, softwa re, and firmware development can be 
an effective means of achieving system resiliency. Contingency plans reflect the degree of 
restoration required for organizational sy stems since not all systems need to fully recover to 
achieve the level of con tinuity of  operations desired. S ystem recovery objectives reflect  applicable 
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, standards, regulations , and guidelines . In addition to  
system avail ability, contingency plans address other security -related  events resulting in a reduction 
in mission  or business effectiveness, such as malicious attacks compromising the confidentiality or 
integrity of system s. Actions addressed in c ontingency plans include, for example, orderly and 
graceful degradation, system shutdown, fallbac k to a manual mode, alternate information flows, 
and operating in mode s reserved for when syste ms are under attack. By coordinating contingency 
planning with incident handling activities, organizations can ensure  that the necessary planning 
activities are in place and activated in the event of a security incident.  
Related Controls :  CP-3, CP -4, CP-6, CP -7, CP -8, CP-9, CP -10, CP -11, CP -13, IR-4, IR-6, IR -8, IR -
9, MA -6, MP -2, MP -4, MP -5, PL -2, PM-8, PM -11, SA -15, SA -20, SC -7, SC -23, SI -12. 
Control Enhancement s: 
(1) CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH REL ATED PLANS  
Coordinate contingency plan development with organizational elements responsible for related 
plans.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Plans related to contingency plans for organizational systems include , 
for exam ple, Business Continuity Plan s, Disaster Recovery Plan s, Continuity of Operations 
Plans, Crisis Communications Plans, Critical Infrastructure Plan s, Cyber Incident Response 
Plans, Insider Threat Implementation Plan, and Occupant Emergency Plan s. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 83 Related Controls :  None.  
(2) CONTINGENCY PLAN | CAPACITY PLANNING  
Conduct capacity planning so that necessary capacity for information processing, 
telecommunications, and environmental support exists during contingency operations . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Capacity planni ng is needed becaus e different types of threats (e.g., 
natural disasters, targeted cyber attacks) can result in a reduction of the available processing, 
telecommunications, and support services originally intended to support the organizational 
missions and  business functions. Organizations need to anticipate degraded operations during 
contingency operations and factor such degradation into capacity planning.  With respect to 
capacity planning, environmental support refers to any environmental support factor for 
which the organization determines that it needs to provide support in a contingency situation, 
even if in a degraded state. As always, such determinations are based on an assessment of 
risk, system categorization (impact level), and organizational risk  tolerance.  
Related Controls :  PE-11, PE -12, PE -13, PE -14, PE -18, SC -5. 
(3) CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME ESSENTIAL MI SSIONS AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS  
Plan for the resumption of essential missions and business functions within [Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period ] of contingency plan activation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose to carry out the contingency planning 
activities in this control enhancement as part of organizational business continuity planning 
including, for example, as part of business impact analyses. The time- period for resumption of 
essential missions and business functions may be dependent on the severity and extent of the disruptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) CONTINGENCY PLAN | RESUME ALL MISSIONS AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS  
The organization plans for the continuance of essential missions and business functions with little 
or no loss of operational continuity and sustains that continuity until full information system 
restoration at  primary processing and/or storage sites.  Plan for the resumption of all missions and 
business functions within [Assignment: organization- defined time  -period] of contingency plan 
activation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose to carry out th e contingency planning 
activities in this control enhancement as part of organizational business continuity planning 
including, for example, as part of business impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage 
sites defined by organizations as part of co ntingency planning may change depending on the 
circumstances associated with the contingency (e.g., backup sites may become primary 
sites). The time -period for resumption of missions and business functions may be dependent 
on the severity and extent of disr uptions to the system and its supporting infrastructure.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) CONTINGENCY PLAN | CONTINUE ESSENTIAL MISSIONS AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS  
Plan for the continuance of essential missions and business functions with little or no loss of 
operatio nal continuity and sustains that continuity until full system restoration at primary 
processing and/or storage sites.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose to carry out the contingency planning 
activities in this control enhancement as part of o rganizational business continuity planning 
including, for example, as part of business impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage 
sites defined by organizations as part of contingency planning may change depending on the 
circumstances associated wi th the contingency.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5)(6)  CONTINGENCY PLAN | ALTERNATE PROCESSIN G AND  STORAGE SITE  
Plan  for the transfer of essential missions and business functions to alternate processing and/or 
storage sites with little or no loss of operational continuity and sustain that continuity through 
system restoration to primary processing and/or storage sites.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose to carry out the contingency planning 
activities in this control enhancement as part of organization al business continuity planning 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 84 including, for example, as part of business impact analyses. Primary processing and/or storage 
sites defined by organizations as part of contingency planning may change depending on the 
circumstances associated with the cont ingency (e.g., backup sites may become primary sites).  
Related Controls :  None . 
(6)(7)  CONTINGENCY PLAN | COORDINATE WITH EXT ERNAL SERVICE PROVID ERS 
Coordinate the contingency plan with the contingency plans of external service providers to 
ensure that contingency requirements can be satisfied.  
Supplemental Guidance :  When the capability of an organization to successfully carry out its 
core missions and business functions is dependent on external service providers, developing a 
timely and comprehensive contingenc y plan may become more challenging. In this situation, 
organizations coordinate contingency planning activities with the external entities to ensure 
that the individual plans reflect the overall contingency needs  of the organization . 
Related Controls :  SA-9. 
(7)(8)  CONTINGENCY PLAN | IDENTIFY CRITICAL A SSETS  
Identify critical system assets supporting essential missions and business functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may choose to carry out the contingency planning 
activities in this control enhancem ent as part of organizational criticality analysis or business 
continuity planning including, for example, as part of business impact analyses. Organizations 
identify critical information system assets so that additional safeguards and countermeasures 
can be employed (beyond those safeguards and countermeasures routinely implemented) to 
help ensure that organizational missions /business functions can continue to be conducted 
during contingency operations. T he identification of critical information assets also facilitates 
the prioritization of organizational resources. Critical system assets include  both technical and 
operational aspects. Technical aspects include, for example, information technology services, 
system components, information technology products , and mechanisms. Operational aspects 
include, for example, p rocedures (manually executed operations) and personnel (individuals 
operating technical  safeguards  and/or executing manual procedures ). Organizational program 
protection plans can aid  in identify ing critical assets.  
Related Controls :  CM-8, RA -9. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 34; NIST Interagency Report  8179 . 
CP-3 CONTINGENCY TRAINING  
 Control :  Provide contingency train ing to system users consistent with assigned roles and 
responsibilities:  
a. Within [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] of assumi ng a contingency role or 
responsibility ; 
b. When required by system changes;  and 
c. [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] thereafter.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Contingency training provided by organizations is linked to the assigned 
roles and responsibilities of organizational personnel  to ensure that the appropriate content and 
level of detail is included in such training . For example, regular users may only  need to know 
when and where to report for duty during contingency operations and if normal duties ar e affected;  
system administrators  may require  additional training on how  to set up systems at alternate 
processing and storage sites; and managers/senior leaders may receive more specific training on how to conduct mission -essential functions in designated  off-site locations and how to establish 
communications with other governmental entities for purposes of coordination on contingency -
related activities. Training for contingency roles/responsibilities reflects the specific continuity 
requirements in the co ntingency plan.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, AT -4, CP -2, CP -4, CP -8, IR -2, IR -4, IR -9. 
Control Enhancements : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 85 (1) CONTINGENCY TRAINING  | SIMULATED EVENTS  
Incorporate simulated events into contingency training to facilitate effective response by personnel 
in crisis situations.   
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) CONTINGENCY TRAINING  | AUTOMATED TRAINING ENVIRONMENTS  
Employ automated mechanisms to provide a more  thorough and realistic contingency training 
environment.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 50. 
CP-4 CONTINGENCY PLAN TESTING  
 Control : 
a. Test the contingency plan for the system [ Assig nment: organization- defined frequency ] using 
[Assignment: organization -defined tests ] to determine the effectiveness of the plan and the 
organization al readiness to execute the plan;  
b. Review the contingency plan test  results ; and 
c. Initiate corrective actions , if needed . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Methods for testing contingency plans to determine the effectiveness of the 
plans and to identify potential weaknesses  in the plans include, for example,  walk -through  and 
tabletop  exercises , checklists, simulation s (parallel, full interrupt), and comprehensive exercises . 
Organizations conduct testing based on the continuity requirements in contingency plan s and 
include a determination of the effects on organizational operations , assets , and individuals arising 
due to con tingency operations.  Organizations have flexibility and discretion in the breadth, depth, 
and timelines of corrective actions.  
Related Controls :  AT-3, CP -2, CP -3, CP -8, CP -9, IR -3, IR -4, PL -2, PM -14. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONTINGENCY PLAN TES TING | COORDI NATE WITH RELATED PL ANS  
Coordinate contingency plan testing with organizational elements responsible for related plans.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Plans related to contingency plans for organizational systems include , 
for example,  business continuity p lans, disaster recovery p lans, continu ity of operations plan s, 
crisis c ommunicati ons plans , critical infrastructure p lans, cyber incident response p lans, and 
occupant emergency p lans. This control enhancement does not require organizations to create 
organization al elements to handle related plans or to align such elements with specific plans. 
It does require, however, that if such organizational elements are responsible for related plans, 
organizations should coordinate with those elements.  
Related Controls :  IR-8, PM -8. 
(2) CONTINGENCY PLAN TES TING | ALTERNATE PROCESSIN G SITE  
Test the contingency plan at the alternate processing site : 
(a) To familiarize contingency personnel with the facility and available resources;  and 
(b) To evaluate the capabilities of the alternate pro cessing site to support contingency 
operations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CP-7. 
(3) CONTINGENCY PLAN TES TING | AUTOMATED TESTING  
Employ automated mechanisms to more thoroughly and effectively test  the contingency plan.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 86 Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms facilitate more thorough and effective testing 
of contingency plans. This occurs by providing more complete coverage of contingency 
issues;  by selecting more realistic test scenarios  and environments; and by effectively 
stressing  the system and supported missions  and business operations . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) CONTINGENCY PLAN TES TING | FULL RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  
Include a full recovery and reconstitution of the system to a known state as part of contingency 
plan testing.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CP-10, SC -24. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication s 800-34, 800-84. 
CP-5 CONTINGENCY PLAN UPDATE  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CP -2]. 
CP-6 ALTERNATE STORAGE SITE  
 Control : 
a. Establish  an alternate storage site including necessary agreements to permit the storage and 
retrieval  of system backup information ; and  
b. Ensure that the alternate storage  site provides security controls  equivalent to that of the 
primary site . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Alternate storage sites are sites that are geographically d istinct from 
primary storage site s. An alternate storage site maintain s duplicate copies of information  and data  
if the primary storage site is not available.  Items covered by alternate storage s ite agreements 
include, for example, environmental conditions at alternate sites , access rules, physical and 
environmental protection  requirements , and coordination of delivery /retrieval of backup media.  
Alternate storage sites reflect the requirements in contingency plan s so that organizations can 
maintain essential missions  and business functions despite disruption, compromise, or failure  in 
organizational systems.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP-7, CP -8, CP-9, CP-10, MP-4, MP -5, PE- 3, SC -36, SI -13. 
Control E nhancements : 
(1) ALTERNATE STORAGE SI TE | SEPARATION FROM PRI MARY SITE  
Identify an  alternate storage site that is separated from the primary storage site to reduce 
susceptibility to the same threats.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Threats that affect alternate storage sites are typically defined in 
organizational assessments of risk and include, for example, natural disasters, structural 
failures, hostile cyber attacks, and errors of omission or commission. Organizations determine 
what is considered a sufficient degr ee of separation between primary and alternate storage 
sites based on the types of threats that are of concern. For one particular type of threat 
(i.e.,threat s such as  hostile cyber attack), attacks , the degree of separation between sites is less 
relevant.  
Related Controls :  RA-3. 
(2) ALTERNATE STORAGE SI TE | RECOVERY TIME AND RECOVERY POINT OBJECTIVES  
Configure the alternate storage site to facilitate recovery operations in accordance with recovery 
time and recovery point objectives.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Non e. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) ALTERNATE STORAGE SI TE | ACCESSIBILITY  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 87 Identif y potential accessibility problems to the alternate storage site in the event of an area- wide 
disruption or disaster and outlines explicit mitigation actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Area -wide disruptions refer to those types of disruptions that are broad 
in geographic scope (e.g., hurricane, regional power outage) with such determinations made 
by organizations based on organizational assessments of risk. Explicit mitigation actions 
include, for example , duplicating backup information at other alternate storage sites  if access  
problems occur at  originally designated  alternate site s; or planning for physical access to 
retrieve backup information  if electronic accessibility to the alter nate site is disrupted.  
Related Controls :  RA-3. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 34. 
CP-7 ALTERNATE PROCESSING SITE  
 Control : 
a. Establish  an alternate pro cessing site including necessary agreements to permit the transfer 
and resumption of [ Assignment: organization- defined system operations ] for essential  
missions  and business functions within [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period 
consistent with rec overy time and recovery point  objectives ] when the primary processing 
capabilities are unavailable;  
b. Make available at the alternate processing site, the equipment and supplies required to transfer 
and resume operations or put contracts in place to support delivery to the site  within the 
organization -defined time -period for transfer and resumption; and 
c. Provide information security and privacy safeguards  at the alternate processing site that are 
equivalent to those  at the primary site . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Alternate processing sites are sites that are geographically d istinct from 
primary processing  sites. An alternate processing site provides processing capability if  the primary 
processing site is not available.  Items Geographically distributed architectures  may also be 
considered as alternate processing sites. Safeguards that are covered by alternate processing site 
agreements include, for example, environmental conditions at alternate sites; access rules ; physical 
and environmental protection  requirements; and the coordination for the transfer and assignment 
of personnel . Requirements are specifically allocated to alternate processing sites that reflect  the 
requirements in contingency plans  to maintain essential missions  and business functions despite 
disrup tion, compromise, or failure  in organizational systems.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP-6, CP -8, CP -9, CP -10, MA -6, PE-3, PE- 11, PE -12, PE -17, SC -36, SI -
13. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ALTERNATE PROCESSING  SITE | SEPARATION FROM PRI MARY SITE  
Identif y an alternate p rocessing site that is separated from the primary processing site to reduce 
susceptibility to the same threats.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Threats that affect alternate processing sites are typically defined in 
organizational assessments of risk and include, for example, natural disasters, structural 
failures, hostile cyber attacks, and errors of omission/commission. Organizations determine 
what is considered a sufficient degree of separation between primary and alternate processing 
sites based on the types of  threats that are of concern. For one particular type of threat 
(i.e.,threat s such as  hostile cyber attack), attack s, the degree of separation between sites is less 
relevant.  
Related Controls :  RA-3. 
(2) ALTERNATE PROCESSING  SITE | ACCESSIBILITY  
Identif y potential accessibility problems to the alternate processing site in the event of an area-
wide disruption or disaster and outlines explicit mitigation actions.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 88 Supplemental Guidance :  Area -wide disruptions refer to those types of disruptions that are broad 
in geographic scope (e.g., hurricane, regional power outage) with such determinations made 
by organizations based on organizational assessments of risk.  
Related Controls :  RA-3. 
(3) ALTERNATE PROCESSING  SITE | PRIORITY OF SERVICE   
Develop alternate processing site agreements that contain priority -of-service provisions in 
accordance with organizational  availability requirements  (including recovery time objectives) . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Priority -of-service agreements refer to negotiated agreements with 
service pro viders that ensure that organizations receive priority treatment consistent with their 
availability requirements and the availability of information resources at the alternate 
processing site.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) ALTERNATE PROCESSING  SITE | PREPARATIO N FOR USE  
Prepare the alternate processing site so that the site  is ready to be used as the operatio nal site 
supporting essential missions and business functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Site preparation includes, for example, establishing configuration 
settings for system components at the alternate processing site consistent with the 
requirements for such settings at the primary site and ensuring that essential supplies and 
other logistical considerations are in place.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM -6, CP -4. 
(5) ALTERNATE PROCESSING  SITE | EQUIVALENT INFORMAT ION SECURITY SAFEGUARDS  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into  CP-7]. 
(6) ALTERNATE PROCESSING  SITE | INABILITY TO RETURN  TO PRIMARY SITE  
Plan and prepare for circumstances that preclude returning to the primary processing site.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 34. 
CP-8 TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES  
 Control :  Establish  alternate telecommunications services including necessary agreements to permit 
the resumption of [ Assignment: organization -defined system operations ] for essential missions and 
business functions within [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] whe n the primary 
telecommunications capabilities are unavailable at either the primary or alternate processing or 
storage sites . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to telecommunications services (data and voice) for 
primary and alternate processing and storage sites. A lternate telecommunications services  reflect 
the continuity requirements in contingency plans  to maintain essential missions  and business 
functions despite the loss of primary telecommunications services. Organizations may specify 
diffe rent time -periods for primary/alternate sites. Alternate telecommunications services  include, 
for example, additional organizational or commercial ground -based circuits /lines  or satellite s in 
lieu of ground -based  communications . Organizations consider f actors such as availability, quality 
of service, and acces s when entering alternate telecommunications agreements . 
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP-6, CP -7, CP -11, SC -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TELECOMMUNICATIONS S ERVICES | PRIORITY OF SERVICE  PROVISIONS  
(a) Develop pri mary and alternate telecommunications service agreements that contain priority -
of-service provisions in accordance with organizational  availability requirements (including 
recovery time objectives) ; and  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 89 (b) Request Telecommunications Service Priority for all t elecommunications services used for 
national security emergency preparedness in the event that if the primary and/or alternate 
telecommunications services are provided by a common carrier.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations consider the potential mission /business impact in 
situations where telecommunications service providers are servicing other organizations with 
similar priority -of-service provisions.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) TELECOMMUNICATIONS S ERVICES | SINGLE POINTS OF FA ILURE  
Obtain alternate telecommunications services to reduce  the likelihood of sharing a single point of 
failure with primary telecommunications services.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) TELECOMMUNICATIONS S ERVICES | SEPARATION OF PRIMARY AND  ALTERNATE PROVIDER S 
Obtain alternate telecommunications services  from providers that are separated from primary 
service providers to reduce susceptibility to the same threats . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Threats that affect telecommunications services are typically defined 
in organizational assessments of risk and include, for example, natural disasters, structural 
failures, hostile cyber/physical attacks, and errors of omission/commission. Organizations 
seek to reduce common susceptibilities by , for example, minimizing  shared i nfrastructure 
among  telecommunications service providers  and achieving sufficient geographic separation 
between services. Organizations may consider using a single service provider in situations 
where the service provider can provide alternate telecommunications services meeting the 
separation needs addressed in the risk assessment.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) TELECOMMUNICATIONS S ERVICES | PROVIDER CONTINGENC Y PLAN  
(a) Require primary and alternate telecommunications service providers to have contingency 
plans;  
(b) Review provider contingency plans to ensure that the plans meet organizational contingency 
requirements; and  
(c) Obtain evidence of contingency testing and training by providers [ Assignment: organization-
defined frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Reviews of pro vider contingency plans consider the proprietary nature 
of such plans. In some situations, a summary of provider contingency plans may be sufficient 
evidence for organizations to satisfy the review requirement. Telecommunications service 
providers may also participate in ongoing disaster recovery exercises in coordination with the 
Department of Homeland Security, state, and local governments. Organizations may use these 
types of activities to satisfy evidentiary requirements related to service provider contingency 
plan reviews, testing, and training.  
Related Controls :  CP-3, CP -4. 
(5) TELECOMMUNICATIONS S ERVICES | ALTERNATE TELECOMMU NICATION SERVICE TESTING  
Test alternate telecommunication services [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  CP-3. 
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 34.  
CP-9 SYSTEM BACKUP  
 Control : 
a. Conduct backups of user -level information contained in the system [ Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency consistent with recovery time and recovery point objectives ]; 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 90 b. Conduct backups of system -level information contained in the system [ Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency consistent with recovery time and recovery point objectives ]; 
c. Conduct backups of  system documentation including security- related documentation  
[Assignment: organization -defined frequency consistent with recovery time and recovery 
point objectives ]; and   
d. Protect the confident iality , integrity , and availability  of backup information at storage 
location s. 
Supplemental Guidance :  System -level information includes, for example, system -state information, 
operating system software,  application software, and licenses. User -level info rmation includes any 
information other than system -level information. Mechanisms employed  by organizations to 
protect the integrity of system backups include, for example, digital signatures and cryptographic 
hashes. P rotection of backup information while in transit is bey ond the scope of this control. 
System backups reflect the requirements in contingency plans as well as other organizational 
requirements for backing up information.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP-6, CP-10, MP-4, MP -5, SC -13, SI -4, SI -13. 
Cont rol Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM BACKUP | TESTING FOR RELIABI LITY AND INTEGRITY  
Test backup information [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] to verify media reliability 
and information integrity.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CP-4. 
(2) SYST EM BACKUP | TEST RESTORATION US ING SAMPLING  
Use a sample of backup information in the restoration of selected system functions as part of 
contingency plan testing.  
Supplemental Guidance : 
Related Controls :  CP-4. 
(3) SYSTEM BACKUP | SEPARATE STORAGE FO R CRITIC AL INFORMATION  
Store backup copies of [ Assignment: organization -defined  critical system software and other 
security- related information ] in a separate facility or in a fire- rated container that is not col located 
with the operational system.  
Supplemental G uidance :  Critical system software includes, for example, operating systems, 
cryptographic key management systems, and intrusion detection/prevention systems . 
Security -related information includes, for example, organizational inventories of hardware, 
softw are, and firmware components. Alternate storage sites typically serve as separate storage 
facilities for organizations.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM-6, CM-8. 
(4) SYSTEM BACKUP | PROTECTION FROM UNA UTHORIZED MODIFICATI ON  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CP -9]. 
(5) SYSTEM BACKUP | TRANSFER TO ALTERNA TE STORAGE SITE  
Transfer system backup information to the alternate storage site [ Assignment: organization-
defined time-period and transfer rate consistent with the recovery time and recovery point 
objectives].  
Supplemental  Guidance :  System backup information can be transferred to alternate storage sites 
either electronically or by physical shipment of storage media.  
Related Controls :  CP-7, MP -3, MP -4, MP -5. 
(6) SYSTEM BACKUP | REDUNDANT SECONDARY  SYSTEM  
Conduct  system backup  by maintaining a redundant secondary system that is not collocated  with 
the primary system and that can be activated without loss of information or disruption to 
operations . 
Supplemental Guidance :  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 91 Related Controls :  CP-7. 
(7) SYSTEM BACKUP | DUAL AUTHORIZATI ON  
Enforce dual authorization for the deletion or destruction of [ Assignment: organization- defined 
backup information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Dual authorization ensure s that the deletion or destruction of backup 
information cannot occur unless two quali fied individual s carry out the task . Individuals 
deleting/destroying backup information possess sufficient skills/expertise  to determine if the 
proposed deletion/destruction of backup information reflects organizational policies and 
procedures . Dual author ization may also be known as two -person control.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -5, MP -2. 
(8) SYSTEM BACKUP | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTEC TION  
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to prevent unauthorized disclosure and modification of 
[Assignment: organization- defined backup information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  The selection of cryptographic mechanisms is based on the need to 
protect the confidentiality and integrity of backup information. The strength of mechanism is 
commensurate with the security category and/or classifi cation of the information. This control 
enhancement applies to system backup information in storage at primary and alternate 
locations. Organizations implementing cryptographic mechanisms to protect information at 
rest also consider cryptographic key manag ement solutions.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13, SC -28. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 186-4; NIST Special Publication s 800-34, 800-130, 800-152.  
CP-10 SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  
 Control :  Provide for the recovery and reconstitution of the system to a known state after a 
disruption, compromise, or failure  within [Assignment: or ganization- defined time -period 
consistent with recovery time  and recovery point  objectives ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Recovery is executing contingency plan activities to restore organizational 
missions and business functions. Reconstitution takes place following recovery and includes 
activities for returning systems to fully operational states. R ecovery and reconstitution operations 
reflect  mission and business  priorities, recovery point, time, and reconstitution objectives, and 
established organizational  metrics  consistent with contingency plan requirements . Reconstitution 
includes the deactivation of any interim system capabilities that may have been needed during 
recovery operations. Reconstitution also includes assessments of fully restored system capabi lities, 
reestablishment of continuous monitoring activities, system reauthorizations  (if required),  and 
activities to prepare the systems against future disruptions, compromises, or failures. R ecovery  
and reconstitution capabilities  employed by organizatio ns can include both automated mechanisms 
and manual procedures.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP -4, CP -6, CP -7, CP -9, IR -4, SC -24, SI -13. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  | CONTINGENCY PLAN TE STING  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CP -4]. 
(2) SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  | TRANSACTION RECOVERY  
Implement transaction recovery for systems that are transaction -based.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Transaction -based syste ms include, for example,  database 
management systems and transaction processing s ystems . Mechanisms supporting transaction 
recovery include, for example, t ransaction rollback and transaction journaling.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  | COMPENSATING SECURI TY CONTROLS  
[Withdrawn: Addressed through tailoring procedures ]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 92 (4) SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  | RESTORE WITHIN TIME -PERIOD  
Provide the capability to restore system components within  [Assignment: organization- defined 
restoration time- periods ] from configuration- controlled and integrity -protected infor mation  
representing a known , operational state for the components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Restoration of system components includes, for example, reimaging 
which restores components to known, operational states.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM -6. 
(5) SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTI ON | FAILOVER CAPABILITY  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -13]. 
(6) SYSTEM RECOVERY AND RECONSTITUTION  | COMPONENT PROTECTIO N  
Protect system components used for  backup and restoration.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Protection of system backup and  restoration components ( hardware, 
firmware, and software)  includes both physical and technical safeguards. Backup and 
restoration software includes, for example, r outer tables , compilers , and other security-
relevant system software.   
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -6, MP -2, MP -4, PE- 3, PE- 6. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 34. 
CP-11 ALTERNATE COMMUNICATIONS PROTOCOLS  
 Control :  Provide the capability to employ [ Assignment: organization- defined alternative 
communications protocols ] in support of maintaining continuity of operations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Contingency plans and the training/testing associated with those plans, 
incorporate an alternate communications protocol capability as part of establishing resilience in 
organizational systems. Alternate communications protocols include, for example, switching from 
TCP/IP Version 4 to TCP/IP Version 6. Switching communications protocols may affect software 
applications and therefore, operational aspects of systems. Organizations assess  the potential side 
effects of introducing such alternate communications protocols  are analyzed  prior to 
implementation.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP -8, CP -13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
CP-12 SAFE MODE  
 Control :  When [ Assignment: organization- defined  conditions ] are detected, enter a safe mode of 
operation with [ Assignment: organization- defined restrictions of safe mode of operation].  
Supplemental Guidance :  For systems supporting critical missions and business functions including, 
for example, military operations and weapons systems, civilian space operations, nuclear power 
plant operations, and air traffic control operations (especially real -time operational environments), 
organizations can identify certain conditions under which those systems revert to a predefined safe 
mode of operation. The safe mode of operation, which can be activated automatically or manually, restricts the activities or operations syste ms can execute when those conditions are encountered. 
Restriction includes, for example, allowing only certain functions that can be carried out under limited power or with reduced communications bandwidth.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, SC -24, SI -13, SI -17. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 93 CP-13 ALTERNATIVE SECURITY MECHANISMS  
 Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined alternative or supplemental security 
mechanisms ] for satisfying [ Assignment: organization- defined security functions ] whe n the 
primary means of implementing the security function is unavailable or compromised.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control supports system resiliency, contingency planning, and 
continuity of operations. To ensure mission and business continuity, organiz ations can implement 
alternative or supplemental security mechanisms. These mechanisms may be less effective than 
the primary mechanisms  (e.g., not as easy to use, not as scalable, or not as secure). . However, 
having the capability to readily employ these alternative or supplement al mechanisms , enhances 
overall mission and business continuity that might otherwise be adversely impacted if operations 
had to be curtailed until the primary means of implementing the functions was restored. Given the cost and lev el of effort required to provide such alternative capabilities, this control is typically 
applied only to critical security capabilities provided by systems, system components, or system services. For example, an organization may issue to senior executives  and system administrators 
one-time pads in case if multifa ctor tokens, the organization’s standard means for secure remote 
authentication, is compromised.  
Related Controls :  CP-2 CP-11, SI -13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None .
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 94 3.7   IDENTIFIC ATION AND AUTHENTICATION  
Quick link to Identification and Authentication summary table  
IA-1 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION POLICY AND PROCEDURES 
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defin ed personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. An identification and authentication policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executiv e Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the identification and authentication policy 
and the associated identification and authentication  controls; 
b. Designate an [ Assignment:  organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
identification and authentication policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  identification and authentication: 
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the identification and authentication procedures implement the identification and 
authentication policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the ide ntification 
and authentication policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the IA 
family. The risk manageme nt strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect appli cable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance procedures help provide security and privacy assuran ce. 
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for orga nization s or conversely, or can be 
represented by multiple policies refle cting the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents . It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures or procedure . 
Related Controls :  AC-1, PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-63, 
800-73, 800-76, 800-78, 800-100; NIST Interagency Report  7874 . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 95 IA-2 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)  
 Control :  Uniquely identify and a uthenticate organizational users or processes acting on behalf of 
organizational users.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can satisfy the ident ification and authentication requirements 
in this control by complying with the requirements in Homeland Security Presidential Directive 
12. Organizational users include employees or individuals that organization s consider having the 
equivalent status of  employees  including, for example, contractors  and guest researchers.  This 
control applies to all accesses other than accesses that are explicitly identified  and documented in 
AC-14 and that occur through the authorized use of group authenticators without individual 
authentication . Organizations may require u nique identification of individuals in group accounts 
(e.g., shared privilege accounts) or for detailed accountability of individual activity.  Organizations 
employ passwords,  tokens physical authenticators , or biometrics  to authenticate user identities , or 
in the case of multifactor authentication, some combination thereof.  Access to organizational  
systems is defin ed as either local access or network access. Local access is any access to 
organizational syst ems by user s or process es acting on behalf of users, wher e such access is 
obtained through  direct connection s without the use of networks. Network access is access to 
organizational system s by user s (or process es acting on behalf of users) where such acces s is 
obtained through network connections (i.e., nonlocal accesses). Remote access is a type of 
network access that  involves communication through external networks  (e.g., the Internet). . 
Internal networks include local area networks  and wide area networks . The use of encrypted 
virtual private networks  for network connections between organization -controlled endpoints and 
non-organization controlled endpoints may be treated as internal networks with respect  to 
protecting the confidentiality and integrity of information traversing the network.  Identification 
and a uthentication requirements for  non-organizatio nal users are described in IA -8. 
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -3, AC -4, AC-14, AC -17, AC-18, AU -1, AU- 6, IA-4, IA -5, IA-8, MA -
4, MA -5, PE- 2, PL -4, SA -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTICATIO N (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | MULTIFACTOR AUTHENTI CATION  
NETWORK  ACCESS TO PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS  
Implement  multifactor authentication for network access to privileged accounts.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Multifa ctor authentication requires the use of two or more different 
factors to achieve authentication. Factors are defined as follows: something you know , for 
example, a password or perso nal identification number (PIN) ; something you have, for 
example, a physica l authenticator or cryp tographic identification device , token); ; or 
something you are , for example, a biometric. Multifactor solutions that require devices 
separate from information system s gaining access feature physical authenticators  include, for 
example , hardware tokens authenticators  providing time -based or challenge -response 
authenticators and smart cards such as the U.S. Government Personal Identity Verification 
card or the DoD common access card. In addition to identifying and authenticating users at 
the system level (i.e., at logon), organizations may also employ identification and 
authentication mechanisms at the application level, when necessary at their discretion , to 
provide increased information security . Identification and Regardless of the type o f access 
(i.e., local, network, or remote) privileged accounts are always authenticated using multifactor 
options appropriate for the level of risk. Organizations can add additional security measures, 
such as additional or more rigorous  authentication requirements for other than organizatio nal 
users are described in IA -8. mechanisms, for specific types of access . 
Related Controls :  AC-5, AC -6. 
(1)(2)  IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTI CATI ON | NETWORK 
ACCESS TO (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | MULTIFACTOR AUTHENTI CATION  TO NON -PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS   
Implement  multifactor authentication for network  access to non- privileged accounts.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Multifactor authentication requires the use of two or more different 
factors to achieve authentication. Factors are defined as fo llows: something you know , for 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 96 example, a perso nal identification number (PIN) ; something you have, for example, a physical 
authenticator or cryptographic private key  stored in hardware or software; or something you 
are, for example, a biometric. Multifactor solutions that feature physical authenticators  
include, for example, hardware authenticators providing time -based or challenge -response 
authenticators and smart cards such as the U.S. Government Personal Identity Verification 
card or the DoD common access card. In addition to authenticating users at the system level, 
organizations may also employ authentication mechanisms at the application level, at their 
discretion, to provide increased information security . Organizations can also provide 
additional se curity measures, such as additional or more rigorous authentication mechanisms, 
for specific types of access.  
Related Controls :  AC-5. 
(3) IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENT ICATION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | LOCAL ACCESS TO PRIVIL EGED 
ACCOUNTS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated i nto IA -2(1)(2)].  
The information system implements  multifactor authentication for local access to privileged 
accounts.  
(2)(4)  IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICAT ION 
(ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | LOCAL ACCESS TO NON -PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(1)(2)]. 
The information system implements  multifactor authentication for local access to non -privileged 
accounts.  
(5) IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATIO N (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | INDIVIDUAL AUTHENTICATION WITH 
GROUP  AUTHENTICATION  
When shared accounts  or authentic ators are employed, require users to be individually 
authenticated before granting access to the shared accounts or resources.  
The organization requires individuals to be authenticated with an individual authenticator when a 
group authenticator  is employed . 
 
Supplemental Guidance :  Requiring individuals  Individual authentication prior  to use individual 
authenticators as a second level of the shared group  authentication helps organizations to 
mitigate the risk of using group accounts or authenticators.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3)(6)  IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTICATIO N 
(ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | NETWORK ACCESS TO PRIV ILEGED ACCOUNTS  — SEPARATE DEVICE   
(4) [Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(1)(2)] . The information system implements multifactor 
authentication for network access to privileged accounts such that one of the factors is provided 
by a device separate from the system gaining access and the device meets [ Assignment: 
organization- defined strength of mechanism requirements ]. 
 
(5)(7)  IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTICAT ION 
(ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | NETWORK ACCESS TO NON -PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS  — SEPARATE DEVICE   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(1)(2)   
The information system implements multifactor authentication for network access to non -
privileged accounts such that one of the factors is provided by a device separate from the system 
gaining access and the device meets [ Assignment: organization -defined strength of mechanism 
requirements ]. 
(6)(8)  IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION | NETWORK ACCESS TO PRIVILEGED  IDENTIFICATION AND 
AUTHENTICATIO N (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | NETWORK ACCESS TO ACCOUNTS  — REPLAY RESISTANT   
Implement  replay -resistant authentication mechanisms for netw ork access to [ Selection (one or 
more): privileged accounts; non- privileged accounts] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Authentication p rocess es resist replay attacks if it is impractical to 
achieve successful authentication s by replaying p revious authentication messages. Replay -
resistant techniques include , for example,  protocols that use nonces or challenges  such as 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 97 Transport Layer Secur ity (TLS) and time synchronous or challenge -response one -time 
authenticators . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(7)(9)  IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTICATIO N (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | NETWORK ACCESS TO N ON-
PRIVILEGED ACCOUNTS  — REPLAY RESISTANT   
The information system implement s replay -resistant authentication mechanisms for network 
access to non -privileged accounts.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Authentication process es resist replay attacks if it is impractical to 
achieve successful authentication s by recording /replaying p revious au thentication message s. 
Replay -resistant t echniques include , for example, protocols that use nonces or challenges  such 
as Transport Layer Security  (TLS)  and time synchronous or challenge -response one -time 
authenticators . 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(8)]. 
(8)(10)  IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATIO N (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | SINGLE SIGN -ON  
Provide a single sign -on capability for [ Assignment: organization- defined  list of information  
system accounts and services].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Single sign -on enables user s to log in once and gain access to multiple 
information system resources. Organization s consider the operational efficienc ies provided by 
single sign -on capabilities  with the increased risk from disclosures  of single authenticator s 
providing access to mult iple system resources risk introduced by allowing access to multiple 
systems via a single authentication event. Single sign -on can present opportunities to improve 
system security, for example by providing the ability to add multifactor authentication for 
applications that may not be able to natively support this function. This situation may occur in 
legacy applications or systems . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(9)(11)  IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTICAT ION 
(ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | REM OTE ACCESS — SEPARATE DEVICE   
The informa tion system implements multifactor authentication  for remote access to privileged and 
non- privileged accounts such that  one of the factors is provided by a device separate from the 
system  gaining access and the  device meets [ Assignment: organization -define d strength of 
mechanism requirements] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  For remote access to privileged /non-privileged accounts, t he purpose 
of requiring a device that is separate from the information system gaining access for one of 
the factors during multifactor authentication is to reduce the likelihood of compromising 
authentication credentials  stored on the system . For example, adversaries deploying malicious 
code on organizational information systems can potentially compromise such credentials 
resident on the system  and subsequently impersonate authorized users . Related control: AC -6. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(1)(2)] . 
(10)(12) IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATIO N (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV 
CREDENTIALS   
Accept and electronically verif y Personal Identity Verification cred entials.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to organizations implementing 
logical access control systems (LACS) and physical access control systems  (PACS) .. Personal 
Identity Verification ( PIV) credentials are th ose credentials issued by federal agencies  that 
conform to FIPS Publication 201 and supporting guidance documents. OMB Memorandum 
11-11 requires federal agencies to continue implementing the requirements specified in 
HSPD -12 to enable agency -wide use of PI V credentials. The adequacy and reliability of PIV 
card issuers are addressed and authorized using NIST Special Publication 800 -79. Acceptance 
of PIV credentials includes derived PIV credentials, the use of which is addressed in NIST 
Special Publication 800-166. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(11)(13) IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICA TION (ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | OUT-OF-BAND AUTHENTICATION   
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 98 The information system implements [ Assignment: o rganization- defined out -of-band authentication]  
under [ Assignment: organization- defined conditions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Out -of-band authentication (OOBA) refers to the use of two separate 
communication paths to identify and authenticate users or devices to an information system. 
The first path (i.e., the in -band path), is used to identify and authenticate users or devices, and 
generally is the path through which information flows. The second path (i.e., the out -of-band 
path) is used to independently ve rify the authentication and/or requested action. For example, 
a user authenticates via  a notebook computer  to a remote server  to which the user desires 
access , and requests some action of the server via that communication path. Subsequently , the 
server con tacts the user via the user’s cell  phone to verify th at the requested action originated 
from the user. The user may either confirm the intended action to an individual on the 
telephone or provide an authentication  code via the telephone. This type of authentication can 
be employed by organizations to mitigate actual or suspected man -in the -middle attacks. The 
conditions for activation can include, for example, suspicious activities, new threat indicators 
or elevated threat levels, or the impact  level or cla ssification level of information in requested 
transactions.  Related controls: IA -10, IA -11, SC -37. 
References :  HSPD -12; OMB Memorand a 04-04, 06-16, 11-11; FIPS Publication 201; NIST 
Special Publications 800- 63, 800-73, 800 -76, 800- 78; FICAM Roadmap and Im plementation 
Guidance;  Web: http://idmanagement.gov.  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(1)(2)] . 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 201, 202; NIST Special Publications 800- 63, 800-73, 800-
76, 800-78, 800-79, 800-156, 800-166; NIST Interagency Reports  7539, 7676 , 7817, 7849 , 7870 , 
7874, 7966 . 
IA-3 DEVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION  
Control :  Uniquely identif y and authenticate [ Assignment: organization- defined specific and/or 
types of devices ] before establishing a [ Selection (one or more) : local ; remote ; network ] 
connection.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational  Devices requiring unique device- to-device identification 
and authentication may be are defined by type, by device, or by a combination of type  and device. 
Information system s typically use either Organization -defined device types may include devices 
that are not owned by the organization. S ystem s use shared known informat ion (e.g., Media 
Access Control [ MAC ] or Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol [TCP/IP] addresses) 
for device identification or organizational authentication solutions (e.g., IEEE 802.1x and 
Extensible Authentication Protocol [EAP], RADIUS server with EAP -Transport Layer Security 
[TLS] authentication, Kerberos) to identify and authenticate devices on local and wide area 
networks. Organizations determine the required strength of authentication mechanisms by based on  
the security categories of system s and mission/business requirements.  Because of the challenges of 
implementing  this control on large scale, organizations  are encouraged to only apply can restrict  
the application of  the control to those a limited number (and type) of devices that trulybased  on 
organizational  need  to support this capability . . 
Related Controls :  AC-17, AC -18, AC -19, AU-6, CA-3, CA-9, IA-4, IA -5, IA-9, IA -11, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DEVICE IDENTIFICATIO N AND AUTHENTICATION | CRYPTOGRAPHIC BIDIRECTIONAL AUTHENTICAT ION  
Authenticate [Assignment: organization- defined  specific devices and/or types of  devices]  before 
establishing [Selection (one or more) : local ; remote ; network ] connection using bidirectional 
authentication that is cryptographically based.  
Supplemental Guidance :  A local connection is any connection with a device communicating 
without the use of a network. A network  connection is any connection with a device that 
communica tes through a network (e.g., local  area or wide area network, Internet). . A remote 
connectio n is any connection with a device communicating through an external  network  (e.g., 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 99 the Internet). . Bidirectional authentication provides stronger safeguards to validate the identity 
of other devices for connections that are of greater risk  (e.g., remote co nnections).  . 
Related Controls :  SC-8, SC -12, SC -13. 
(2) DEVICE IDENTIFICATIO N AND AUTHENTICATION | CRYPTOGRAPHIC BIDIRECTIONAL NETWORK 
AUTHENTICATION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -3(1)].  
(3) DEVICE IDENTIFICATIO N AND AUTHENTICATION | DYNAMIC ADDRESS ALL OCATIO N 
(a) Standardizes Where addresses are allocated dynamically, standardize  dynamic address 
allocation  lease information and the lease duration  assigned to devices in accordance with 
[Assignment: organization- defined lease information and lease duration ]; and  
(b) Audit lease information when assigned to a device.  
Supplemental Guidance :  DHCP  and DHCPv6 are typical protocols that enable clients obtain ing 
to dynamically obtain Internet Protocol  address leases for IP addresses from DHCP servers , is 
a typical  example of  dynamic address allocation for devices . . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) DEVICE IDENTIFICATIO N AND AUTHENTICATION | DEVICE ATTESTATION  
Handle device identification and authentication based on attestation by [ Assignment: organization-
defined configuration managem ent process].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Device attestation refers to the identification and authentication of a  
device based on its configuration and  known operating state. This might be determined via 
some cryptographic hash of the device. If device att estation is the means of identification and 
authentication, then it is important that patches and updates to the device are handled via a 
configuration management pr ocess such that the patches and updates are done securely and at 
the same time do not disrupt t he identification and authentication to other devices.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM -3, CM -6. 
References :  None.  
IA-4 IDENTIFIER MANAGEMENT 
 Control :  Manage system identifiers by:  
a. Receiving authorization from [Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or roles ] to assign 
an individual, group, role,  or device identifier;  
b. Selecting an identifier that identifies an individual, group, role,  or device;  
c. Assigning the identifier to the intended individual, group, role, or device;  and 
d. Preventing reuse of identifier s for [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] . 
(1) Disabling the identifier after [ Assignment: organization- defined time period of inactivity ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Common device identifiers include, for example,  media access control 
(MAC) , Internet Protocol addresses, or device- unique token identifiers. Management of individual  
identifiers is not applicable to shared system accounts  (e.g., guest and anonymous accounts). . 
Typically, individual identifier s are the user name s of the system account s assigned to those 
individuals. In such instances, the account management activities of AC -2 use account names 
provided by IA -4. This control also addresses  individual identifiers not necessarily associated with 
system account s (e.g., identifier s used in physic al security control database s accessed by badge 
reader system s for access to information system s).. Preventing the reuse of identifiers implies 
preventing the assignment of previously used individual, group, role, or device identifiers to different individ uals, groups, roles, or devices.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, IA-3, IA -5, IA -8, IA -9, MA -4, PE- 2, PE- 3, PE- 4, PL -4, PM -12, PS -3, PS -4, 
PS-5, SC -37. 
Control Enhancements : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 100 (1) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | PROHIBIT ACCOUNT IDENTIFIERS AS PUBLIC IDENTIFIERS  
Prohibit the us e of system account identifiers that are the same as public identifiers for individual  
electronic mail accounts.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Prohibiting the use of systems account identifiers that are the same as 
some public identifier such as the individual identifier section of an electronic mail address, 
makes it more difficult for adversaries to guess user identifiers on organizational systems . The 
use of this control alone only complicates guessing of identifiers and must be combined with 
appropriate prote ctions for authenticators and attributes to protect the account as a whole.  
Related Controls :  AT-2. 
(2) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | SUPERVISOR AUTHORIZ ATION  
The organization requires that the registration process to receive an individual identifier include s 
super visor authorization.  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -12(1)].  
(3) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | MULTIPLE FORMS OF C ERTIFICATION  
The organization requires multiple forms of certification of individual identification such as 
documentary evidence or a combination of documents and biometrics be presented to the 
registration authority.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Requiring multiple forms of identification reduces the likelihood of 
individuals using fraudulent identification  to establish an identity , or at least increases the 
work factor of potential adversaries . 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -12(2)].  
(4) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | IDENTIFY USER STATU S  
Manage individual  identifiers by uniquely identifying each  individual  as [Assignment: organization -
defined characteristic identify ing individual  status ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Characteristics identifying the status of individuals include, for 
example, contractors and foreign nationals. Identifying the status of individuals by specific 
characteristics provides additional information  about the people with whom organizational 
personnel are communicating. For ex ample, it might be useful for a government employee to 
know that one of the individuals on an email message is a cont ractor . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | DYNA MIC MANAGEMENT  
Manage individual identifiers dynamically. 
Supplemental Guidance :  In contrast to conventional approaches to identification which presume 
static accounts for preregistered users, many distributed systems including, for example, 
service -oriented architectures,  rely on establishing systems establish  identifiers at run time for 
entities that were previously unknown.  In these situations, organizations anticipate and 
provision for the dynamic establishment of identifiers. Pre -established trust relationships and 
mechanisms with appropriate authorities to validate identities and related credentials are 
essential.  
Related Controls :  AC-16. 
(6) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | CROSS -ORGANIZATION MANAGEM ENT  
Coordinate with [ Assignment: organization -defined external  organizations ] for cross -organization 
management of identifiers.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Cross- organization identifier management provides the capability for 
organizations to appropriately identify individuals, groups, roles, or devices when conducting cross-organization activities involving the processing, storage, or transmission of information.  
Related Controls :  AU-16, IA -2, IA -5. 
(7) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | IN-PERSON REGISTRATION  
The organization requires that the registration process to receive an indivi dual identifier be 
conducted in person before a designated registration authority.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 101 Supplemental Guidance :  In-person  registration reduces the likelihood of fraudulent identifiers 
being issued because it requires the physical presence of individuals and act ual face -to-face 
interaction s with designated registration authorities.  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -12(4)].  
(8) IDENTIFIER MANAGEMEN T | PAIRWISE PSEUDONYMOU S IDENTIFIERS  
Generate pairwise pseudonymous identifiers.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Generating distin ct pairwise pseudonymous identifiers, with no 
identifying information about a subscriber, discourages subscriber activity tracking and 
profiling beyond the operational requirements established by an organization. The pairwise 
pseudonymous identifiers are u nique to each relying party, except in situations where relying 
parties show a demonstrable relationship justifying an operational need for correlation, or all 
parties consent to being correlated in such a manner.  
Related Controls :  IA-5. 
References :  FIP S Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800- 63, 800-73, 800-76, 800-78. 
IA-5 AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEMENT  
 Control :  Manage system authenticators by:  
a. Verifying, as part of the initial authenticator distribution, the identity of the individual, group, 
role, or device receiving the authenticator; 
b. Establishing initial authenticator co ntent for any authenticators defined issued  by the 
organization;  
c. Ensuring that authenticators have sufficient strength of mechanism for their intended use;  
d. Establishing and implementing administrative procedures for initial authenticator distribution, for lost/compromised or damaged authenticators, and for revoking authenticators;  
e. Changing default content of authenticators prior to  information system installation ; 
f.e. Establishing minimum and maximum lifetime restrictions and reuse conditions for 
authenticators;  
g.f. Changing/refreshing authenticators [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period by 
authenticator type ]; 
h.g. Protecting authenticator content from unauthorized disclosure and modification;  
i.h. Requiring individuals  to take, and having devices implement, specific security 
safeguards controls  to protect  authenticators ; and  
j.i. Changing authenticators for group/role accounts when membership to those accounts changes . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Examples of individual  authenticators include  passwords, tokens, 
biometrics, PKI certificates cryptographic devices, one -time password devices , and key cards. The 
initial authenticator content is the actual content (e.g.,of  the authenticator, for example, the initial 
password) as opposed to. In contrast, the  requirements about authentica tor content (e.g.,include, 
for example, the  minimum password length.  Developers may ship system components with 
factory default authentication credentials to allow for initial installation and configuration.  Default 
authentication credentials are often wel l known, easily discoverable, and present a significant 
security risk.  The requirement to protect individual  authenticators may be implemented via control 
PL-4 or PS -6 for authenticators in the possession of individuals  and by controls AC -3, AC -6, and 
SC-28 for authenticators stored in  organizational  system s including, for example, passwords 
stored in hashed  or encrypted format s or files containing encrypted or hashed passwords 
accessible with administrator  privileges . System s support  individual authenticat or management by 
organization -defined settings and restrictions for various authenticator characteristics including, 
for example, minimum password length, password composition, validation time window for time 
synchronous one -time tokens, and number of allo wed rejections during the verification stage of 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 102 biometric aut hentication. Actions  that can be taken to safeguard individual authenticators include, 
for example, maintaining possession of authenticators, not loaning or sharing authenticators with 
others, an d reporting lost , stolen,  or compromis ed authenticators immediately. Authenticator 
management includes issuing and revoking, when no longer needed, authenticators for temporary 
access such as that required for remote maintenance. Device authenticators incl ude, for example, 
certificates and passwords.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -6, CM -6, IA-2, IA-4, IA -7, IA -8, IA -9, MA -4, PE- 2, PL -4. 
Control Enhancements :  
(1) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | PASSWORD -BASED AUTHENTICATION   
For password- based authentication:  
(a) Maintain  a list of commonly -used, expected, or compromised passwords and update the list 
[Assignment: organization- defined frequency] and when organizational passwords have been 
compromised;  
(b) Verify , when users create or update passwords, that the  passwords are not found on  the 
organization- defined list of commonly -used, expected, or compromised passwords ; 
(c) Transmit only cryptographically -protected passwords;  
(d) Store passwords using an approved hash algorithm and salt, preferably using a keyed hash;  
(e) Require immediate selection of a new password upon account recovery; and 
(f) Allow user selection of long passwords and passphrases, including spaces and all printable 
characters.  
(g) Employ automated tools to assist the user in selecting strong password authenticators.  
Supplemental  Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to passwords regardless of whether 
they are used in single -factor  or multi -factor authentication. Long passwords or passphrases 
are preferable over shorter passwords. Enforced composition rules provide marginal security 
benefit while decreasing usability. Account recovery can occur, for example, in situations 
when a password is forgotten. Cryptographically -protected passwords include, for example, 
salted  one-way cryptographic hashes of passwords . The list of comm only- used, expected, or 
compromised passwords may include, for example, passwords obtained from previous breach 
corpuses, dictionary words, and repetitive or sequential characters. Examples include aaaaaaa, 
1234abcd, and qwertyuiop. The list can also inclu de context specific words, for example, the 
name of the service, username, and derivatives thereof.  
 
(a) Enforces minimum password complexity of [ Assignment: organization- defined requirements 
for case sensitivity, number of characters, mix of upper -case letter s, lower -case letters, 
numbers, and special characters, including minimum requirements for each type]; 
(b) Enforces at least the following number of changed characters when new passwords are 
created : [Assignment: organization- defined number ]; 
(c) Enforces password  minimum and maximum lifetime restrictions of [ Assignment: organization -
defined numbers for lifetime minimum, lifetime maximum];  
(d) Prohibits password reuse for [ Assignment: organization- defined number ] generations; and  
(e) Allows the use of a temporary password for system logons with an immediate change to a 
permanent password . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to passwords regardless of whether 
they are used in single -factor  or multi -factor authentication  of individuals using passwords  as 
individual or group authenticator s, and in a similar manner , when passwords are part of  
multifactor authenticators . This control  enhancement  does not apply when  passwords are used 
to unlock hardware authenticators  (e.g., Personal Identity Verification c ards). The 
implementation of such password mechanisms may not meet all  of the requirements in the 
enhancement. . Long passwords or passphrases are preferable over shorter passwords. 
Enforced composition rules provide marginal security benefit while decreasing usability. 
Account recovery can occur, for example, in situations when a password is forgotten.  
Cryptographically -protected passwords include, for example, encrypted versions of passwords  
andsalted  one-way cryptographic hashes of passwords . The number of c hanged characters 
refers to the number of changes required with respect to the total number of positions in the 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 103 current password. Password lifetime restrictions do not apply to temporary passwords. To 
mitigate certain brute force attacks against passwords,  organizations may also consider salting 
passwords.  The list of commonly -used, expected, or compromised passwords may include, for 
example, passwords obtained from previous breach corpuses, dictionary words, and repetitive 
or sequential characters. Examples include aaaaaaa, 1234abcd, and qwertyuiop. The list can 
also include context specific words, for example, the name of the service, username, and 
derivatives thereof.  
Related Controls :  IA-6. 
(2) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | PKIPUBLIC KEY -BASED AUTHENTICATION   
for PKI For public key -based authentication:  
(a) Validates certificationsEnforce authorized access to the corresponding private key;  and 
(b) Map the authenticated identity to the account  of the individual or group; and  
When public key infrastructure (PKI) is used : 
(a)(c)  Validate certificates by constructing and verifying a certification path to an accepted 
trust anchor including  checking certificate status information;  and 
(b)(d) Implement a local cache of revocation data to support path discovery and validation  
in case of inabi lity to access revocation information via the network.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Public key cryptography is a valid authentication mechanism for 
individuals and machines/devices. When PKI is leveraged,  status information for certification 
paths includes, for  example, certificate revocation lists or certificate status protocol responses.  
For PIV cards, the validation of certifications certificates  involves the construction and 
verification of a certification path to the Common Policy Root trust anchor including 
certificate policy processing. Related control: IA -6.which includes certificate policy 
processing.  Implementing a local cache of revocation data to support path discovery and 
validation supports system availability in situations where organizations are un able to access 
revocation information via the network  
Related Controls :  IA-3, SC -17. 
(3) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | IN-PERSON OR TRUSTED THIRD -EXTERNAL PARTY REGISTRATION  
The organization requires that the registration process to receive [ Assignment: organiz ation -
defined types of and/or specific authenti cator s] be conducted  [Selection: in person ; by a trusted 
third  party ] before [Assignment: organization -defined registration authority ] with authorization by 
[Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -12(4)].  
(4) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | AUTOMATED SUPPORT  FOR PASSWORD STRENGT H DETERMINATION  
The organization employs automated  tools to determine if password authenticators  are sufficiently 
strong to  satisfy [ Assignment: o rganization- defined requirements] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement focuses on the creation of strong passwords 
and the characteristics of such passwords  (e.g., complexity)  prior to use , the enforcement of 
which is carried out by organizati onal information systems  in IA -5 (1) . Related controls: CA -
2, CA -7, RA -5. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -5(1)]. 
(5) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | CHANGE AUTHENTICATO RS PRIOR TO DELIVERY   
Require developers and installers of system components  to provide unique a uthenticators or 
change default authenticators prior to delivery and installation . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement extends the requirement for organizations to 
change default authenticators upon system installation, by requiring developers  and/or 
installers to provide unique authenticators or change default authenticators for system 
components prior to delivery and/or installation. However, it typically does not apply to the 
developers of commercial off -the-shelf information technology products. Requirements for 
unique authenticators can be included in acquisition documents prepared by organizations 
when procuring systems or system components.  
Related Controls :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 104 (6) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | PROTECTION OF AUTHE NTICATORS  
Protect authenticators  commensurate with the security category  of the information to which use of 
the authenticator permits access.  
Supplemental Guidance :  For systems containing multiple security categories of information 
without reliable  physical or logical separation be tween categories, authenticator s used to grant 
access to the systems are protected commensurate with the highest security category of 
information on the system s. Security categories of information are determined as part of the 
security categorization process.  
Related Controls :  RA-2. 
(7) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | NO EMBEDDED UNENCRY PTED STATIC AUTHENTI CATORS  
Ensure that unencrypted static authenticators are not embedded in applications or access scripts 
or stored on function keys.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Orga nizations exercise caution in det ermining whether embedded or 
stored authenticator s are in encrypted or unencrypted form. If authenticators are used in the 
manner stored , then those  representation s are considered unencrypted authenticator s. This is 
irrespe ctive of whether that representation is perhaps an encrypted version of something else  
(e.g., a password ).. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(8) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | MULTIPLE SYSTEM ACC OUNTS  
Implement  [Assignment: organization -defined security safeguards] to ma nage the risk of 
compromise due to individuals having accounts  on multiple systems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  When individuals have accounts on multiple systems , there is the risk 
that a compromise of one account may lead to the compromise of other accounts if  individuals  
use the same authenticator s. Possible alternatives include: having  different authenticators on 
all systems; employing some form of single sign -on mechanism;  or using  some form of one -
time passwords on all systems.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(9) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGEME NT | CROSS -ORGANIZATION FEDERATED  CREDENTIAL MANAGEME NT  
The organization coordinates withUse  [Assignment: organization- defined external organizations] 
for cross- organi zation management of credentialsto  federate authenticators.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Cross- organization management of credentials Federation  provides the 
capability for organizations to appropriately authenticate individuals , groups, roles, or  and 
devices when conducting cross -organization activities involving the processing,  storage, or 
transmission of information.  
Related Controls :  AU-7, AU -16. 
(10) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | DYNAMIC CREDENTIAL ASSOCIATION BINDING  
The information system Bind identities and authenticators  dynamically  provisions identities . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Authentication requires some form of binding between an identity and 
the authenticator used to confirm the identity. In conventional approaches, this binding is 
established by pre -provisioning both the identity and the authenticator to the system. For 
examp le, the binding between a username ( i.e., identity) and a password ( i.e., authenticator) is 
accomplished by provisioning the identity and authenticator  as a pair in the system. New 
authentication techniques allow the binding between the identity and the authenticator to be 
implemented outside a system. For example, with smartcard credentials, the identity and the 
authenticator are bound together on the smart card. Using these credentials, systems can 
authenticate identities that have not been pre -provisioned, dynamically provisioning the 
identity after authentication. In these situations, organizations can anticipate the dynamic 
provisioning of identities. Pre -established trust relationships and mechanisms with appropriate 
authorities to validate identities a nd related credentials are essential.  
Related Controls :  AU-16, IA -5. 
(11) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | HARDWARE TOKEN -BASED AUTHENTICATION   
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 105 The information system, for hardware token -based authentication,  employs mechanisms that 
satisfy [ Assignment: organization- defined token  quality requirements].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Hardware t oken- based authentication typically refers to the use of 
PKI-based tokens, such as  the U .S. Government Personal Identity Verification (PIV) card.  
Organizations define specific requirem ents for token s, such as working with a particular PKI.  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into IA -2(1)(2)] . 
(12) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | BIOMETRIC AUTHENTICATION PERFORMANCE  
For biometric -based authentication,  employ mechanisms that satisfy [ Assignment: organization-
defined biometric quality requirements ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Unlike password -based authentication which provides exact matches 
of user -input passwords to stored passwords, biometric authentication does not provide such 
exact matches. Depending upon the  type of biometric and the  type of collection mechanism,  
there is likely to be some divergence from the presented biometric and stored biometric which 
serves as the basis of comparison . There will likely be both false positive s and false negative s 
when mak ing such comparisons . The matching performance is the rate at which the false 
accept and false reject rates  are equal is k nown as the crossover rate. a biometric algorithm 
correctly results in a match for a genuine user and reject s other users . Biometric 
qualityperformance requirements include, for example, acceptable crossover rates , as that 
essen tially the match rate as this  reflects the accuracy of the biometric matching algorithm  
being used by a system . 
Related Controls :  AC-7. 
(13) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | EXPIRATION OF CACHED AUTHENTICATORS  
Prohibit the use of cached authenticators after  [Assignment: organization- defined time-period ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(14) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | MANAGING CONTENT OF  PKI TRUST STORES  
For PKI-based authentication, e mploy a deliberate organization -wide  methodology f or managing 
the content of PKI trust s tores installed across all platforms including networks, operating 
systems, browsers, and applications.   
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Relat ed Controls :  None . 
(15) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | FICAM GSA-APPROVED PRODUCTS AN D SERVICES  
Use only FICAM General Services Administration -approved path discovery and validation validated  
products and services.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management ( FICAM General 
Services Administration (GSA )-approved path discovery and validation produc ts and services 
are those the products and services that have been approved through the FICAM GSA  
conformance program , where applicable, and pos ted to the GSA Approved Products List . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(16) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | IN-PERSON OR TRUSTED EXTERNAL PARTY AUTHENTICATOR ISSUANCE  
Require that the issuance of [ Assignment: organization -defined types of and/or specific 
authenticators] b e conducted  [Selection: in person; by a trusted external party ] before 
[Assignment: organization- defined registration authority ] with authorization by [Assignment: 
organization- defined personnel  or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  IA-12. 
(17) AUTHENTICATOR MANAGE MENT | PRESENTATION ATTACK DETECTION FOR BIOMET RIC AUTHENTICATORS  
Employ presentation attack detection mechanisms for biometric- based authentication.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Biometric characteristics do not constitute secrets. Suc h characteristics 
can be obtained by online web accesses; taking a picture of som eone with a camera phone to 
obtain facial images  with or without their knowledge; lifting from objects that  someone has 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 106 touched, for example, a latent fingerprint;  or capturin g a high- resolution image, for example, 
an iris pattern . Presentation attack detection technologies  including, for example, liveness 
detection , can mitigate the risk of these types of at tacks by making it more difficult to produce 
artifacts intended to def eat the biometric sensor . 
Related Controls :  AC-7. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 180-4, 201, 202; NIST Special Publications 800- 73, 800-63, 
800-76, 800-78; NIST Interagency Reports  7539, 7817, 7849 , 7870, 8040 . 
IA-6 AUTHENTICATOR FEEDBACK  
Control :  Obscure feedback  of authentication information during the authentication process to 
protect the information from possible exploitation  and use by unauthorized individuals.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The feedback from systems does not provide information that  would allow 
unauthorized individuals to compromise authentication mechanisms. For some  types of  systems  or 
system components, for example, desktops/notebooks with relatively large monitors, the  threat  
(referred to as shoulder surfing) may be significant. For other types of systems or components , for 
example, mobile devices with 2-4 inch screens small displays , this threat may be less  significant , 
and may need to be is balanced against the increased likelihood  of typographic input errors due to 
the small keyb oards.  Therefore,  the means for obscuring  authenticator feedback is selected 
accordingly.  Obscuring authenticator  feedback  of authentication information  includes, for 
example, displaying asterisks when users type passwords into input devices , or displaying  
feedback for a very limited time before fully obscuring it . 
Related Controls :  AC-3. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
IA-7 CRYPTOGRAPHIC MODULE AUTHENTICATION  
 Control :  Implement  mechanisms for authentication to a cryptographic module that meet the 
requirements of applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, 
standards, and guidelines  for such authentication.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Authentication mechanisms may be required within a cryptographic 
module to au thenticate an operator accessing the module and to verify that the operator is 
authorized to assume the requested role and perform services within that role.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, IA -5, SA -4, SC -12, SC -13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  FIP S Publication 140-2.  
IA-8 IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON -ORGANIZATIONAL USERS)  
 Control :  Uniquely identify and a uthenticate non -organizational users or processes acting on behalf 
of non- organizational users.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Non -organizational users include system users other than organizational 
users explicitly covered by IA -2. These individuals  are uniquely identified and authenticated for 
accesses other than those accesses explicitly identified and documented in AC -14. In accordance 
with the E-Authentication E -Government initiative, Identification and  authentication of non-
organizational users accessing federal  information  systems  may be required to  protect federal, 
proprietary, or privacy -related information  (with exceptions noted for national security systems). 
Organizations use risk assessment s to determin e authentication needs  and consider many factors 
including s calability, practicality, security , and privacy  in ba lancing the need to ensure ease of use 
for access to federal information and systems with the need to protect and adequately mitigate risk  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 107 IA-2 addresses i dentification and authentication requirements for access to information system s by 
organizationa l users. 
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -6, AC-14, AC-17, AC -18, AU -6, IA -2, IA -4, IA -5, IA -10, IA -11, MA-
4, RA -3, SA -4, SA -12, SC -8. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTI CATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV 
CREDENTIALS FROM OTHER AGENC IES 
Accept and electronically verif y Personal Identity Verification cred entials from other federal 
agencies.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to both logical and physical access 
control systems. Personal Identity Verification ( PIV) credentials are those credentials issued 
by federal agencies  that conform to FIPS Publication 201 and supporting guidance 
documents. OMB Memorandum 11 -11 requires federal agencies to continue implementing the 
requirements specified in HSPD -12 to enable agency- wide use guidelines.  The adequacy and 
reliability  of PIV credentials. card issuers are addressed and authorized using NIST Special 
Publication 800 -79.  
Related Controls :  PE-3. 
(2) IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | ACCEPTANCE OF  THIRD -
PARTY EXTERNAL  CREDENTIALS  
Accept only external  credentials  that are NIST compliant.  
The information system  accepts only FICAM -approved third -party credentials.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement typically applies to organizational systems 
that are accessible t o the public, for example, public -facing websites. Third -party External  
credentials are those credentials issued by nonfederal government entit ies approved by the 
Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management (FICAM)  Trust Framework Solutions 
initiative. . Such credentials are certified as compliant with NIST Special Publication 800 -63 
by an approved accreditation authority . Approved third -party external  credentials meet or 
exceed t he set of minimum federal government -wide techni cal, security, privacy, and 
organi zational maturity requirements. This allows federal government relying parties to trust 
such credentials at their approved assurance levels.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2)(3)  IDENTIFICATION AND IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | USE OF 
FICAM -APPROVED PRODUCTS  
The organization employs only FICAM -approved information system components in [ Assignment: 
organization- defined information systems] to accept third -party credentials.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement typically applies to information systems that 
are accessible to the general public, for example, public- facing websites. FICAM -approved 
information system components include, for example, information technology products and 
software libra ries that have been approved by the Federal Identity, Credential, and Access 
Management conformance program. Related control: SA -4. 
[Withdraw n: Incorporated into IA -8(2)]. 
(3)(4)  IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | USE OF FICAM NIST-ISSU ED 
PROFILES  
The information system conforms t o FICAM Conform to NIST -issued profiles  for identity 
management . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses open identity management 
standards. To  ensure that these identity management  standards a re viable, robust, reliable, 
sustainable  (e.g., available in commercial information technology products), , and 
interoperable as documented, the United States Government assesses and scopes identity 
management the standards and technology implementations aga inst applicable federal 
legislation laws, Executive Orders , directives, policies, and requirements . regulations, 
standards , and guidelines . The result is FICA MNIST -issued implementation profiles  of 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 108 approved protocols  (e.g., FICAM .  protocols such as SAML 2. 0 and OpenID 2.0, as well as 
other protocols such as the FICAM B ackend Attribute Exchange). Related control: SA -4. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4)(5)  IDENTIFICATION AND A UTHENTICATION  (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | ACCEPTANCE OF PIV -I 
CREDENTIALS  
Accept and electronically verif y Personal Identity Verification -I (PIV-I) cred entials.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to both logical access control and 
physical access control systems. It addresses Non -Federal Nonfederal  Issuers  (NFIs)  of 
identit y car ds that desire to inter operate with United States Government Personal Identity 
Verification (PIV) system s and that can be trusted by federal government -relying parties . The 
X.509 certificate policy  for the Federal Bridge Certification Au thority (FBCA) addresses 
PIV-I requirements. The PIV -I card  is suitable for Assurance Level 4  commensurate with the 
PIV credentials  as defined in OMB Memorandum 04- 04 and NIST Special Publication  800-
63, and multifactor auth entication as defined in NIST Special Publication 8 00-116.cited 
references.  PIV-I credentials are th e credentials issued by a PIV -I provide r whose PIV -I 
certificate policy  maps to the Federal Bri dge PIV -I Certificate Policy. A PIV -I provider is 
cross- certified  with the FBCA  (direct ly or through another PKI  bridge)  with the FBCA  with 
policies that have been mapped and approved as meeting the requirements of the PIV -I 
policies define d in the FBCA certificate policy.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(6) IDENTIFICATION  AND AUTHENTICATION (NON-ORGANIZATIONAL USERS ) | DISASSOCIABILITY  
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined measures] to disassociate user attributes or 
credential assertion relationships among individuals, credential service providers,  and relying 
parties.  
Supplemental  Guidance :  Federated identity solution s can create increased privacy risks due to 
tracking and profiling of individuals. Using identifier mapping tables or privacy -enhancing 
cryptographic techniques to blind credential service providers and relying parties from each 
other or to make identity a ttributes less visible to transmitting parties can reduce these privacy 
risks.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publication s 800-63, 800-79, 800-116; NIST 
Interagency Report 8062 . 
IA-9 SERVICE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION  
Control :  Identif y and authent icate  [Assignment: organization -defined system services ] using 
[Assignment: organization -defined security safeguards ]. and applications ] before establishing 
communications with devices, users, or other services or applications .  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control supports s ervice- oriented architectures and other distributed 
architectural approaches requiring the identification and authentication of information system 
services . In such architectures, external services  often appear dynamically. Therefore,  information 
systems should be able to determine in a dynamic manner, if external providers and associated 
services are authentic. Safeguards  implemented by  organizational information systems to validate 
provider  and service authenticity Services that may require identification and authentication 
include, fo r example, web applications using digital certificates or services/applications that query 
a database. Identification and authentication methods for system services/applications  include, for 
example, information or code signing, provenance graphs, and/ or electronic signatures indicating 
or including the sources of services.  
Related Controls :  IA-3, IA -4, IA -5. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SERVICE IDENTIFICATI ON AND AUTHENTICATIO N | INFORMATION EXCHANG E  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 109 Ensure that service provider s receive, validate, and transmit  identification and authentication 
information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) SERVICE IDENTIFICATI ON AND AUTHENTICATIO N | TRANSMISSION OF DECISIONS  
Transmit identification and authentication decisions between [ Assignment: organizat ion-defined 
services] consistent with organizational policies.  
Supplemental Guidance :  For distributed  architectures  (e.g., service -oriented architectures) ,, the 
decisions regarding the validation of identification and authentication claims may be  made by 
services separate from the services act ing on those decisions. In such situations , it is necessary 
to provide the identification and authentication decisions ( instead of  the actual identifier s and 
authenticator s) to th e services that need to act on those d ecisions.  
Related Controls :  SC-8. 
References :  None . 
IA-10 ADAPTIVE IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION  
Control :  Require individuals accessing  the system to employ [ Assignment: organization- defined 
supplemental authentication technique s or mechanisms ] unde r specific  [Assignment: 
organization- defined circumstances  or situations ].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Adversaries may compromise individual authentication mechanisms and 
subsequently attempt to impersonate legitimate users . This situation can potentially occ ur with any 
authentication mechanisms employed by organization s. To address  this threat, organizations may 
employ specific techniques  or mechanisms  and establish protocols to assess suspicious behavior  
(e.g., individuals .  Such behavior may include, for example, accessing information that 
theyindividuals  do not typically access as part of their normal duties, roles, or responsibilities ,; 
accessing greater quantities of information  than the individuals would routinely access;  or 
attempting to access information from suspicious network addresses. In situations when pre -
established conditions or triggers occur, organizations can require selected individuals  to provide  
additional authentication information. Another potential use for adaptive identification and 
authentication is to increase the strength of mechanism based on the number and/or types of 
records being accessed.  Related Adaptive authentication does not replace and is not used to avoid 
multifactor mechanisms, but can augment implementations of these co ntrols.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, IA -8. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 63. 
IA-11 RE-AUTHENTICATION  
Control :  Require users and d evices  to re-authenticate when [ Assignment: organization- defined 
circumstances  or situations  requiring re -authentication].   
Supplemental Guidance :  In addition to the re -authentication requirement s associated with 
session device locks, organization s may req uire re -authentication  of individuals and/or devices in 
other certain  situations including, for example, when authenticator s change; (ii) , when or roles 
change; when security categories of systems change; when the execution of privileged function s 
occurs; after a fixed time -period; or periodically.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -11, IA -2, IA -3, IA -8. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 110 IA-12 IDENTITY PROOFING  
 Control : 
a. Identity proof  users that require  accounts  for logical access to systems  based on  appropriate 
identity assurance level requirements as specified in applicable standards and guidelines ;  
b. Resolv e user ide ntities to a unique individual; and  
c. Collect, validate , and verify identity evidence.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Identity proofing is the p rocess of collecting, validating, and verifying 
user’s identity information for the purposes of issuing credentials for accessing a system.  This 
control is intended to mitigate threats to the registration of users and the establishment of their 
accounts.  Standards and guidelines specifying identity assurance levels for id entity proofing 
include NIST Special Publications  800-63 and 800- 63A.  
Related Controls :  IA-1, IA -2, IA -3, IA -4, IA -5, IA -6, IA -8. 
(1) IDENTITY PROOFING  | SUPERVISOR AUTHORIZ ATION  
Require that the registration process to receive an account for logical access include s supervisor 
or sponsor authorization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) IDENTITY PROOFING  | IDENTITY  EVIDENCE  
Require evidence of individual identification be pr esented to the registration authority.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Requiring identity evidence,  such as documentary evidence or a 
combination of  documents , and disseminates  and biometrics , reduces the likelihood of 
individuals using fraudulent identification  to establ ish an identity, or at least increases the 
work factor of potential adversaries . Acceptable forms of evidence are consistent with the risk 
to the systems, roles, and privileges associated with the user’s account.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) IDENTITY PROOFING | IDENTITY EVIDENCE VA LIDATION AND VERIFICATION  
Require that the presented identity evidence be validated and verified through [ Assignment: 
organizational defined methods of validation and verification ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Validating and veri fying identity evidence increases the assurance that 
that accounts, identifiers, and authenticators are being issued to the correct user. Validation 
refers to the process of confirming that the evidence is genuine and authentic and that the data 
contained in the evidence is correct, current, and related to an actual person or individual. 
Verification confirms  and establish es a linkage between the claimed identity and the actual 
existence of the user  presenting the  evidence.  Acceptable methods for validating  and verifying 
identity evidence are consistent with the risk to  the systems, roles, and privileges associated 
with the users account  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) IDENTITY PROOFING  | IN-PERSON VALIDATION AND VERIF ICATION  
Require that the validation and verification of identity evidence be conducted  in person before a 
designated registration authority.  
Supplemental Guidance :  In-person  proofing reduces the likelihood of fraudulent credentials 
being issued because it requires the physical presence of individuals,  the presentation of 
physical identity documents, and actual face- to-face interaction s with designated registration 
authorities.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) IDENTITY PROOFING  | ADDRESS CONFIRMATION  
Require that a [Selection: registration code; notice of proo fing] be delivered through an out -of-
band channel to verify the users address (physical or digital) of record . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 111 Supplemental Guidance :  To make it more difficult for adversaries to pose as legitimate users 
during the identity proofing process, organizations  can use out -of-band methods to increase 
assurance that the individual associated with an address of record was the same person that 
participated in the registration. Confirmation can take the form of a temporary enrollment 
code or a notice of proofing. Th e delivery address for these artifacts are obtained from records 
and not self -asserted by the user. The address can include a physical or a digital address. A 
home address is an example of a physical address. Email addresses and telephone numbers are 
examp les of digital addresses.  
Related Controls :  IA-12. 
(6) IDENTITY PROOFING  | ACCEPT EXTERNALLY -PROOFED IDENTITIES  
Accept externally -proofed identities at [ Assignment: organ ization -defined identity assurance level ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  To limit unnecessary r e-proofing of identities, particularly of non- PIV 
users, organizations accept proofing conducted at a commensurate level of assurance by other 
agencies or organizations. Proofing is consistent with organizational security policy and with 
the identity assur ance level appropriate for the system, application, or information accessed. 
This is a core component of managing federated identities across agencies and organizations.  
Related Controls :  IA-3, IA -4, IA -5, IA -8. 
References :  FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publication s 800-63, 800-63A. 
  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 112 3.8   INDIVIDUAL PARTIC IPATION  
Quick link to Individua l Participation summary table  
IP-1 INDIVIDUAL PARTICIPATION POLICY  AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate  to [Assignm ent: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. An individual participation policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the individual participation policy and the 
associated individual participation  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
individual participation policy and procedures; 
c. Review and update the current  individual participation:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the individual parti cipation procedures implement the individual participation 
policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the individual 
participation policy . 
Supplement al Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of the controls and control enhancements in the IP family. The risk 
management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and proce dures. Comprehensive 
policy and procedures help provide security and privacy assurance. Security and privacy program 
policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need for system -specific policies 
and procedures unnecessary. The policy can  be included as part of the general security and privacy 
policy or can be represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex nature of organizations. 
The procedures can be established for security and privacy programs and for systems, if needed.  
Proce dures describe how policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the personnel 
or role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and 
privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. It is importan t to recognize that restating 
controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100.  
IP-2 CONSENT  
Control :  Implement [Assignment: organization- defined tools or mechanisms ] for users  to authorize 
the processing of their personally identifiable information prior to its collection  that: 
a. Use plain language and provide examples to illustrate the potential privacy risks of the 
authorization; and 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 113 b. Provide a means for users to decline the authorization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control transfers ris k that arises  from the processing of personally 
identifiable information  from the org anization to an individual. It is only selected as required by 
law or regulation or when individuals can be reasonably expected to understand and accept any 
privacy risks arising from their authorization. Organizations consider whether other controls may 
more effectively mitigate privacy risk either alone or in conjunction with consent.  
To help users  understand the risks being accepted  when providing consent, organizations write 
materials in plain language and avoid technical jargon. The examples required in IP -2 a. focus on 
key points necessary for user de cision -making. When developing or purchasing consent tools, 
organizations consider the application of  good information d esign procedures in all user -facing 
consent materials ; use of active voice and conversational style;  logical sequencing of  main points ; 
consistent use of the same word ( rather than synonyms ) to avoid confusion ; the use of bullets, 
numbers, and formatting w here appropriate to aid readability ; and legibility  of text, such as font 
style, size, color, and contrast with surrounding background.  
Related Controls :  AC-16, IP -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONSENT  | ATTRIBUTE MANAGEMENT   
Allow data subjects to tailor use  permissions to selected attributes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Allowing individuals to select how specific data attributes may be 
further used or disclosed beyond the original use may help reduce privacy risk  arising from 
the most sensitive of the data attributes while maintaining utility of th e data.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) CONSENT  | JUST-IN-TIME NOTICE  OF CONSENT  
Present authorizations to process personally identifiable information in conjunction with the data 
action  or [Assignment: organization- defined fr equency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  If th e circumstances under which an individual gave consent have 
changed or a significant amount of time has passed since an individual gave consent for the 
processing of his or her personally identifiable information , the data subject’s assumption 
about how the information is being processed might no longer be accurate or reliable. Just -in-
time notice can help maintain individual satisfaction with how the personally identifiable 
information  is being processed.  
Related Cont rols:  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 63; NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
IP-3 REDRESS  
Control :  
a. Establish and implement a process for individuals to have inaccurate personally identifiable 
information maintained by the organization corrected or amended; and  
b. Establish and implement a process for disseminating corrections or amendme nts of personally 
identifiable information  to other authorized users of the personally identifiable informa tion. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Redress supports the ability of indivi duals to ensure the accuracy of their 
personally identifiable information  held by  organizations. Effective redress processes demonstrate 
organizational commitment to data quality especially in those business functions where inaccurate 
data may result in inappropriate decisions or the denial of benefits and services to individuals. 
Orga nizations use discretion in determining if records are to be corrected or amended, based on 
the scope of redress requests, the changes sought, and the impact of the changes. Other authorized 
users of personally identifiable information include, for example, external information -sharing 
partners.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 114 An effective redress  process includes: providing  effective notice of the existence of a personally 
identifiable information  collection; provid ing plain language explanations of the processes and 
mechanisms for reque sting access to records; establish ing the criteria for submitting requests for 
correction or amendment  of records ; implementing resources to analyze and adjudicate requests; 
implement ing means of correcting or amending data collections; and review ing any d ecisions that 
may have been the result of inaccurate information.   
Related Controls :  IP-4, IP -6, IR-7, PM -28. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) REDRESS  | NOTICE OF CORRECTIO N OR AMENDMENT  
Notify affected individuals if their personally identifiable information has be en corrected or 
amended.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Where personally identifiable information  is corrected or amended, 
organizations take steps to ensure that all au thorized recipients of such information and the 
individual with which the information is assoc iated, are informed of the corrected or amended 
information . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) REDRESS  | APPEAL   
Provide [Assignment: organization -defined process] for individuals to appeal an adverse decision 
and have incorrect information amended.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The Senior Agency Offic ial for Privacy ensures that practical means 
and mechanisms exist and are accessible for ind ividuals to seek the correction or amendment 
of their personally identifiable information. Redress processes are clearly defined and  publicly 
available. Additionally, redress processes include the provision of responses to individuals of 
decisions to deny requests for co rrection or amendment. The responses include the reasons for 
the decisions, a means to record individual objection s to the decisions, and finally, a means of 
requesting reviews of the initial determinations.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
IP-4 PRIVACY NOTICE  
Control :  
a. Make privacy notice(s) available to individuals upon first interacting with an organization , 
and subsequently  [Assignment: organization -defined frequency] ; and . 
b. Ensure that privacy notices are clear and easy -to-understand, expressing information about 
personally identifiable information  processing in plain language . 
Supplemental Guidance :  To he lp users understand how their information is being processed, 
organizations write materials in plain lang uage and avoid technical jargon. W hen developing 
privacy notices, o rganizations co nsider the application of good information design procedures in 
all user-facing materials; use of active voice and conversational style; logical sequencing of main 
points; consistent use of the same word (rather than synonyms) to avoid confusion; use of bullets, 
numbers, and formatting where appropriate to aid readability; and legibility of text, such as font 
style, size, color, and contrast with surrounding background.  
Related Controls :  IP-2, IP -3, IP -4, IP -5, PA -2, PA -3, PA -4, PM -21. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PRIVACY NOTICE | JUST-IN-TIME NOTICE OF PRIVACY AUTHORIZATION  
Present a uthorizations to process personally identifiable information in conjunction with the data 
action , or [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  If the circumstances under which an individual gave consent have 
changed or a sig nificant amount of time has passed since an individual gave consent for the 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 115 processing of his or her personally identifiable information , the data subject’s assumption 
about how the information is being processed might no longer be accurate or reliable. Ju st-in-
time notice can help maintain individual satisfaction with or ability to participate in  how the 
personally identifiable information  is being processed.  
Related Controls :  IP-2, IP -3, IP -5, PA -3, PA -4, PM -22. 
References :  NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
IP-5 PRIVACY ACT STATEMENTS  
Control :  
a. Include Privacy Act Statements on organizational forms that collect personally identifiable 
information , or on separate forms that can be retai ned by individuals ; or 
b. Read a Privacy Act Statement to the individual prior to initiating the collection of personally 
identifiable information verbally.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Privacy Act Statements provide additional formal notice to individuals 
from wh om the information is being collected , notice of the authority of organizations to collect 
personally identifiable information ; whether providing personally identifiable information  is 
mandatory or opti onal; the principal purpose or purposes for which the personally identifiable 
information  is to be used; the intended disclosures or routine uses of the information; and the 
consequences of not providing all or some portion of the information requested. P ersonally 
identifiable information  may be  collected ver bally, for example, when conducting telephone 
interviews or surveys.  
Related Controls :  IP-4, PA-3, PM -20, PM-21. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
IP-6 INDIVIDUAL ACCESS  
Control :  Provide individuals the ability to access their personally id entifiable information  
maintained in organizational  systems  of records.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Access affords indivi duals the ability to review personally identifiable 
information  about them held within organizational systems of records. Access includes t imely, 
simplified, and inexpensive access to data. Organizational processes for allowing access to records 
may differ based on resources, legal requirements, or other factors. The Senior Ag ency Official for 
Privacy is responsible for the content of Privacy  Act regulations and record request processing, in 
consultation with legal counsel. Access to certain types of records may  not be appropriate,  and 
heads of agencies may promulgate rules exempting specific  systems from the access provision of 
the Privacy Ac t. When feasible, those rules will be publicly available. In addition, individuals are 
not entitled to access to information compiled in reasonable anticipation of a civil action or 
proceeding.  
Related Controls :  IP-3, PA -3, PM -27. 
Control Enhancements :  None. 
References :  NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 116 3.9   INCIDENT RESPONSE  
Quick link to Incident Response summary table  
IR-1 INCIDENT RESPONSE POLICY AN D PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. An incident response policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational  entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the incident response policy and the 
associated incident r esponse  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
incident response policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current incident response:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the incident response procedures implement the incident response policy and 
controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the incident 
response policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the IR 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in  establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program pol icies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how pol icies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that re stating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy  and procedures . policy or 
procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publica tions 800-12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-61, 800-83, 800-100. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 117 IR-2 INCIDENT RESPONSE TRAINING  
 Control :  Provide incident response training to system users consistent with assigned roles and 
responsibilities : 
a. Within [ Assignm ent: organization- defined time -period] of assuming an incident response role 
or responsibility ; 
b. When required by system changes; and  
c. [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] thereafter.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Incident response training provided by org anizations is linked to assigned 
roles and responsibilities of organizational personnel to ensure the appropriate content and level of 
detail is included in such training. For example, regular users may only need to know who to call 
or how to recognize an incident  on the information system ; system administrators  may 
require  additional training on how  to handle and remediate incidents; and finally, inc ident 
responders may receive more specific training on forensics, reporting, system recovery, and 
restoratio n. Incident response training includes user training in the identification and reporting of 
suspicious activities, both from external and internal sources.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -4, AT -3, CP -3, IR -3, IR -4, IR -8, IR -9. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INCIDENT RE SPONSE TRAINING | SIMULATED EVENTS   
Incorporate simulated events into incident response training to facilitate effective response by 
personnel in crisis situations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) INCIDENT RESPONSE TR AINING | AUTOMAT ED TRAINING ENVIRONM ENTS  
Employ automated mechanisms to provide a more thorough and realistic incident response 
training environment.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 50. 
IR-3 INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING  
 Control :  Test the incident response capability for the system [ Assignment: organization -defined 
frequency] using [ Assignment: organization- defined tests ] to determine the incident response 
effectiveness and documents the results.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations test incident response capabilities to determine the overall 
effectiveness of the  capabilities and to identify potential weaknesses or defic iencies. Incident 
response testing includes, for example, the use of checklist s, walk -through or tabletop  exercises , 
simulation s (parallel /full interru pt), and comprehensive exercises. Incident response  testing can 
also include a determination of the effects on organizational operations , organizational assets , and 
individuals due to incident response.  Use of qualitative and quantitative data aids in  determin ing 
the effectiveness of incident response processes . 
Related Controls :  CP-3, CP-4, IR-2, IR -4, IR-8, PM -14. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | AUTOMATED TESTING  
Employ automated mechanisms to more thoroughly and effectively test  the incident response 
capability.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations use a utomated mechanisms to more thoroughly and 
effectively test incident response capabilities . This can be accomplished , for example, by 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 118 providing more complete coverage of incident response issues ; by selecting more realistic test  
scenarios and test environments ; and by stressing the respons e capability.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | COORDINATION WITH RELATED PLANS  
Coordinate incident response  testing  with organizational elements responsible for related plans.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational plans related to incident response testing include , for 
example, Business Continuity Plans , Contingency Plans, Disaster Recovery Plan s, Continuity 
of Operations Plan s, Crisis Communications Plans, Occupant Emergency Plans , and Critical 
Infrastructure Plan s. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) INCIDENT RESPONSE TESTING | CONTINUOUS IMPROVEME NT 
Use qualitative and quantitative data from testing to:  
(a) Determine the effectiveness of incident response processes;  
(b) Continuously improve incident response processes incorporating advanced information 
security practices; and  
(c) Provide incident response measures and metrics that are accurate, consistent, and in a 
reproducible format.  
Supplemental Guidance :  To help incident response activities function as intended, organizations 
may use of  metrics and eval uation criteria to assess incident response  programs as part of an 
effort to continually improve response performance. These efforts facilitate  improve ment in  
incident response  efficacy and lessen the impact of incidents.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 84, 800-115. 
IR-4 INCIDENT HANDLING  
Control : 
a. Implement an incident handling capability for security and privacy incidents that includes 
preparation, detection and analysis, containment, eradication, and recovery;  
b. Coordinate incident handling activities with contingency planning activities;  
c. Incorporate lessons learned from ongoing incident handling activities into incident response 
procedures , training, and testing,  and implement the resulting changes  accordingly ; and  
d. Ensure the rigor, intensity, scope, and results of incident handling activities are comparable 
and predictable across the organization . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s recognize that incident resp onse capability is depen dent on 
the capabilities of organizational systems and the mission/business processes being supported by those systems. Therefore, organizations consider  incident response as part of the definition, 
design, and development  of mission/business processes and systems . Incident -related information 
can be obtained from a variety of sources including, for example , audit monitoring, network 
monitoring, physical access monitoring, user/administrator reports, and reported supply chain 
events . Effective incident handling capability includes coordination among many organizational 
entities including , for example, mission/bu siness owners, system owners, authorizing officials, 
human resources offices, physical and personnel security offices, legal departments, operations 
personnel, procurement offices, and the risk executive (function).  
Related Controls :  AC-19, AU -6, AU-7, CM -6, CP-2, CP-3, CP -4, IR -2, IR -3, IR -8, PE-6, PL-2, 
PM-12, SA -12, SC-5, SC -7, SI -3, SI -4, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATED INCIDENT HANDLING PROCESSES  
Employ automated mechanisms to support the incident handling process.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 119 Supplement al Guidance :  Automated mechanisms supporting incident handling processes 
include, for example, online incident management system s; and tools that support collection 
of live response data, full network packet capture, and forensic analysis . 
Related Control s:  None . 
(2) INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RECONFIGURA TION 
Include dynamic reconfiguration of [ Assignment: organization- defined system components]  as 
part of the incident response capability.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Dynamic reconfiguration includes, for example , changes to router 
rules, access control lists, intrusion detection/prevention system parameters, and filter rules 
for firewalls and gateways . Organizations perform dynamic reconfiguration of systems, for 
example, to stop attacks, to misdirect attackers, and to isolate components of systems, thus 
limiting the extent of the damage from breaches or compromises . Organizations include time 
frames for achieving the reconfiguration of systems in the definition of the reconfiguration 
capability, considering the p otential need for rapid response to  effectively address 
sophisticated cyber threats.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -4, CM -2. 
(3) INCIDENT HANDLING | CONTINUITY OF OPERA TIONS  
Identify  [Assignment: organization- defined classes of incidents]  and [Assignment: organi zation -
defined actions to take in response to classes of incidents ] to ensure continuation of 
organizational mission s and business functions .   
Supplemental Guidance :  Classes of incidents include, for example, malfunctions due to 
design/implementation err ors and omissions, targeted malicious attacks, and untargeted 
malicious attacks. Appropriate i ncident response actions include,  for example, graceful 
degradation, system shutdown, fall back to manual mode /alternative technology whereby the 
system operates differently, employing deceptive measures, alternate information flows, or operating in a mode that is reserved solely for when system s are under attack.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) INCIDENT HANDLING | INFORMATION CORRELA TION 
Correlate incident information and individual incident responses to achieve an organization -wide 
perspective on incident awareness and response.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Sometimes the nature of a threat event, for example, a hostile attack, is 
such that it can only be observed by bringing together information from different sources including various reports and reporting procedures established by organizations.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) INCIDENT HANDLING | AUTOMATIC DISABLING  OF SYSTEM  
Implement a configurable capability to automatically di sable the  system if [ Assignment: 
organization- defined security violations ] are detected.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS  — SPECIFIC CAPABILITIES  
Implement an incident handling capability for  incide nts involving  insider threats.  
Supplemental Guidance :  While many organizations address insider threat incidents as an 
inherent part of their organizational incident response capability, this control enhancement provides additional emphasis on this type of  threat and the need for specific incident handling 
capabilities (as defined within organizations) to provide appropriate and timely responses.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(7) INCIDENT HANDLING | INSIDER THREATS  — INTRA -ORGANIZATION COORDIN ATION  
Coordinate an inc ident handling capability for insider threats across [ Assignment: organization-
defined components or elements of the organization].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Incident handling for insider threat incidents (including p reparation, 
detection and analysis, conta inment, eradication, and recovery) requires close coordination 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 120 among a variety of organizational components or elements to be effective. These components 
or elements include, for example, mission/business owners, system owners, human resources 
offices, pro curement offices, personnel/physical security offices, operations personnel, and 
risk executive (function). In addition, organizations may require external support from 
federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) INCIDENT HANDLING | CORRELATION WITH EX TERNAL ORGANIZATIONS   
Coordinate with [ Assignment: organization -defined external organizations] to correlate  and share 
[Assignment: organization- defined incident information] to achieve a cross- organization 
perspective on incid ent awareness and more effective incident responses . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The coordination of incident information with external organizations 
including, for example, mission/business partners, military/coalition partners, customers, and multi -tiered de velopers, can provide significant benefits. Cross -organizational coordination 
with respect to incident handling can serve as an important risk management capability. This 
capability allows organizations to leverage critical information from a variety of so urces to 
effectively respond to information security -related incidents potentially affecting the 
organization’s operations, assets, and individuals.  
Related Controls :  AU -16, PM -16. 
(9) INCIDENT HANDLING | DYNAMIC RESPONSE CA PABILITY  
Employ [ Assignment: organization -defined dynamic response capabilities] to effectively respond 
to security incidents.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses the timely deployment of new or 
replacement organizational capabilities in response to security and priv acy incidents  (e.g., 
adversary  actions during hostile cyber attack s).. This includes capabilities implemented at the 
mission and business process level (e.g., activating alternative mission/business processes)  
and at the system level . 
Related Controls :  None. 
(10) INCIDENT HANDLING | SUPPLY CHAIN COORDI NATION  
Coordinate incident  handling activities involving supply chain events with other organizations 
involved in the supply chain.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations involved in supply chain activities includ e, for example, 
system/product developers, integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assem blers, distributors, 
vendors, and  resellers. Supply chain incidents  include, for example, compromises /breaches  
involving system components, information technology produc ts, development processes or 
personnel, and distribution processes or warehousing facilities.  
Related Controls :  MA -2, SA -9. 
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-61, 800-101, 800-86; NIST Interagency Report 7599 . 
IR-5 INCIDENT  MONITORING  
Control :  Track and document system security and privacy incidents.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Documenting system security  and privacy  incidents includes , for example,  
maintaining recor ds about each incident, the status  of the incident , and other pertinent information 
necessary for forensics ; and evaluating incident details, trends, and handling.  Incident  information 
can be obtained from a variety of sources including, for example,  network monitoring;  incident 
reports; incident response teams ; user complaints;  audit monitoring ; physical access monitoring ; 
and user  and administrator reports.  
Related Controls :  AU -6, AU-7, IR -8, PE- 6, PM -29, SC -5, SC -7, SI -3, SI-4, SI -7. 
Control Enhanc ements : 
(1) INCIDENT MONITORING | AUTOMATED TRACKING , DATA COLLECTION , AND ANALYSIS  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 121 Employ automated mechanisms to assist in the tracking of security and privacy incidents and in 
the collection and analysis of incident information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Auto mated mechanisms for tracking incidents and for collecting  and 
analyzing incident information include, for example, t he Einstein network monitoring device  
and monitoring online Computer In cident Response Centers or other electronic databases of 
incidents  and network monitoring device s. 
Related Controls :  AU -7, IR-4. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 61. 
IR-6 INCIDENT REPORTING  
  Control : 
a. Require personnel to re port suspected security and privacy incidents to the organizational 
incident response capability within [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period]; and 
b. Report  security , privacy, and supply chain incident information  to [Assignment: organization-
defined  authorities ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The intent of this control is to address both specific incident reporting 
requirements within an organization and the formal incident reporting requirements for federal 
agencies and their subo rdinate organizations . Suspected security incidents include, for example, 
the receipt of suspicious email communications that can potentially contain malicious code. The 
types of securitySuspected privacy incidents include, for example a suspected breach of personally 
identifiable  information or the recognition that the processing of personally identifiable 
information creates potential privacy risk. The types of  incident s reported, the content and 
timeliness of the reports, and the designated reporting authorities reflect applicab le federal laws, 
Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidance.  Current federal policy 
requires that all federal agencies  (unless specifical ly exempted from such requirements)  report 
security incidents to the United States Co mputer Emergency Readiness Team (US -CERT) within 
specified time  frame s designated in the US -CERT guidelines Concept of Operations  for Federal 
Cyber Security Incident Handling . 
Related Controls :  CM -6, CP -2, IR-4, IR -5, IR-8, IR -9. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INCIDENT REPORTING | AUTOMATED REPORTING  
Employ automated mechanisms to assist in the reporting of security and privacy incidents.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  IR-7. 
(2) INCIDENT REPORTING | VULNERABILITIES REL ATED TO INCIDENTS  
Report system vulnerabilities associated with reported security and privacy incidents to 
[Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) INCIDENT REPORTING | COORDINATION WITH SUPPLY CHAIN COORDINATION  
Provide  security and privacy incident informatio n to the provider of the product or service and 
other organizations involved in the supply chain for systems or system components related to the 
incident.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations involved in supply cha in activities include, for example, 
system/product developers, integrators, manufacturers, packagers, assem blers, distributors, 
vendors, and  resellers. Supply chain incidents  include, for example, compromises /breaches  
involving system components, informati on technology products, development processes or 
personnel, and distribution processes or warehousing facilities.  Organization s determine the 
appropriate information to share  considering the value gained from support by external 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 122 organizations with the potential for harm due to sensitive controlled unclassified  information 
being released to outside organizations of perhaps questionable trustworthiness.  
Related Controls :  SA-12. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 61. 
IR-7 INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE  
 Control :  Provide an incident response support resource , integral to the organizational incident 
response capability  that offers advice and assistance to users of the system for the handling and 
reporting of security and privacy incidents.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Incident response support resources  provided by organizations  include , for 
example,  help desks, assistance  group s, and access to forensics services  or consume r redress 
services , when required.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, IP -3, IR-4, IR -6, IR-8, PM-28, SA-9. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION AND 
SUPPORT  
Employ automated mechanisms to increase the availability of incident response- related 
information and support.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms can provide a push and/or pull capability for 
users to obtain  incident response assistance. For example, individuals might have access to  a 
website to query the assistance capability, o r conversely, the assistance capability may have 
the ability to can proactively send information to users (general distribution or targeted) as part 
of increasing understanding of current response capabilities  and support.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) INCIDENT RESPONSE ASSISTANCE | COORDINATION WITH E XTERNAL PROVIDERS  
(a) Establish a direct, cooperative relationship between its incident response capability and 
external providers of system protection capability; and  
(b) Identify organizational incident response team members to  the external provider s. 
Supplemental Guidance :  External providers of a system protection capability include, for 
example, the Computer Network Defense program within the U.S. Department of Defense. 
External providers help to protect, monitor, analyze, detect, and respond to u nauthorized 
activity within organizational information systems and networks.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Interagency Report  7559 . 
IR-8 INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN  
 Control : 
a. Develop an incident response plan that:  
1. Provides the organization with a roadmap for implementing its incident response capability;  
2. Describes the structure and organization of the incident response capability;  
3. Provides a high -level approach for how the incident response capability fits into the 
overall organization;  
4. Meets the unique requirements of the organization, which relate to mission, size, 
structure, and functions;  
5. Defines r eportable incidents;  
6. Provides metrics for measuring the incident response capability within the organization ; 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 123 7. Defines the resources and management support needed to effectively maintain and 
mature an incident response capability;  
8. Is reviewed and approved by [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] 
[Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]; and 
9. Explicitly designates responsibility for incident response to [ Assignment: organization -
defined entities, personnel, or roles ]. 
b. Distribute  copies of t he incident response plan to [ Assignment: organization- defined incident 
response personnel  (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements ]; 
c. Reviews the incident response plan [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ]; 
d.c. Update the inciden t response plan to address system and organizational changes or problems 
encountered during plan implementation, execution, or testing;  
e.d. Communicate incident response plan changes to [ Assignment: organization- defined incident 
response personnel (identified by name and/or by role) and organizational elements ]; and 
f.e. Protect the incident response plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification . 
Supplemental Guidance :  It is important that organizations develop and implement  a coordinated 
approach to incident response. Organizational missions, business functions, strategies, goals, and objectives for incident response help to determine the structure of incident response capabilities. 
As part of a comprehensive incident response capability , organizations conside r the coordination  
and sharing of information with external organizations, including, for example, external service 
providers and organizations involved in the supply chain for organizational systems.
 For incidents 
involving personally identifiable informa tion, include a process to determine whether notice to 
oversight organizations or affected individuals is appropr iate and provide that notice accordingly . 
Related Controls :  AC -2, CP -2, CP -4, IR -4, IR -7, IR -9, PE- 6, PL -2, SA -12, SA -15, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INCIDENT RESPONSE PL AN | PERSO NALLY IDENTIFIABLE I NFORMATION PROCESSES  
Include the following additional processes in the Incident Response Plan for incidents involving 
personally identifiable information:  
(a) A process to determine if notice to overs ight organizations is appropriate and to provide that 
notice, if appropriate;  
(b) An assessment process to determine the extent of the harm, embarrassment, inconvenience, 
or unfairness to affected individuals; and  
(c) A process to ensure prompt reporting by organi zational users of any privacy incident to 
[Assignment: organization- defined roles].   
Supplemental Guidance :  Some organizations may be required by law or policy to provide notice 
to oversight organizations in the event of a privacy- related incident.  Organization -defined 
roles to which privacy incidents may be reported include, for example, the Senior Agency 
Official for Privacy, Senior Agency Information Security Officer, Authorizing Official, and 
System Owner.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Sp ecial Publication 800- 61. 
IR-9 INFORMATION SPILLAGE RESPONSE  
  Control :  Respond to information spills by:  
b.a. Identifying the specific information involved in the system  contamination;  
c.b. Alerting [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] of the information spill using 
a method of communication not associated with the spill;  
d.c. Isolating the contaminated system or system component;  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 124 e.d. Eradicating the information from t he contaminated system or component;  
f.e. Identifying other systems or system components that may have been subsequently 
contaminated; and  
g.f. Performing other the following additional actions: [Assignment: organization- defined actions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Info rmation spillage refers  to instances where either classified or 
sensitive controlled unclassified  information is inadvertently placed on systems that are not 
authorized to process such information. Such information spills occur when  infor mation that is 
initially thought to be of low er sensitivity is transmitted to a syste m and then subsequently 
determined to be of high er sensitivity. At that point,  corrective action is required. The nature of the 
organizational response is generally based upon the degree of sensitivity of the spilled information  
(e.g., security category or classification level) ,, the security capabilities of the system, the specific 
nature of contaminated storage  media , and the access authorizations  (e.g., security clearances)  of 
individuals with authorized access to the contaminated system.  The methods used to communicate 
information about the spill after the fact do not involve methods directly associated with the actual 
spill to minimize the risk of further spreading the contamination befor e such contamination is 
isolated and eradicated.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, IR -6, PM -28, PM -30, RA -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION SPILLAGE  RESPONSE | RESPONSIBLE PERSONN EL  
Assign [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] with responsibilit y for responding to 
information spills.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) INFORMATION SPILLAGE  RESPONSE | TRAINING  
Provide information spillage response training [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None. 
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, CP -3, IR -2. 
(3) INFORMATION SPILLAGE  RESPONSE | POST -SPILL OPERATIONS   
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined procedures] to ensure that organizational personnel 
impacted by information spills can continue to carry out a ssigned tasks while contaminated 
systems are undergoing corrective actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Correction actions for systems contaminated due to information 
spillages may be very time -consuming. During those periods, personnel may not have access 
to the contaminated systems, which may potentially affect their ability to conduct 
organizational business.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) INFORMATION SPILLAGE  RESPONSE | EXPOSURE TO UNAUTHO RIZED PERSONNEL  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguard s] for personnel exposed to 
information not within assigned access authorizations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Security safeguards include, for example, ensuring that personnel who 
are exposed to spilled information are made aware of the federal laws, Executiv e Orders, 
directives, regulations, policies, standards, and/or regulations  guidelines  regarding the 
information and the restrictions imposed based on exposure to such information.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
IR-10 INTEGRATED  INFORMATION  SECURITY  ANALYSIS  TEAM  
Control :  Establish an integrated team of forensic  and malicious code analysts, tool developers, and 
real-time operations personnel  to handle incidents . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 125 Supplemental Guidance :  Having an integrated team for incident response facilitates  information 
sharing. Such capability allow s organizational personnel, including developers, implementers, and 
operators, to leverage the team knowledge of the threat to  implement defensiv e measures that will 
enable organizations  to deter intrusions more e ffectively. Moreover , integrated teams promote  the 
rapid detection  of intrusions, development of appropriate mitigation s, and the deployment of 
effective defensive measures. For example, w hen an intrusion is de tected, the integrated analysis 
team  can rapid ly develop an appropriate response for operators to implement, correlate the new 
incident with information on past intrusions, and augment ongoing intelligence development. This 
enables the team  to identify adversary TTPs tactics, techniques, and procedures  that are linked  to 
the operations tempo or to specific missions  and business functions , and to define responsive 
actions in a way that does not disrupt those mission s and business operations . Ideally ,functions.  
Information security analysis teams are dist ributed within organizations to make the capability  
more resilient . 
Related Controls :  AT-3.  
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 150; NIST Interagency Report  7559 .
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 126 3.10   MAINTENANCE  
Quick link to Maintenance summary table  
MA-1 SYSTEM MAINTENANCE POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Devel op, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A system maintenance policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and 
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the system maintenance policy and the 
associated system maintenance  controls; 
b. Designa te an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
system maintenance policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current system maintenance:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the system mai ntenance procedures implement the system maintenance policy and 
controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the maintenance 
policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the MA 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and pr ocedures  
reflect applicable  federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the  organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policie s reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
procedures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
imple mented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not c onstitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy  and procedures . policy or 
procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
MA-2 CONTROLLED MAINTENANCE  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 127 a. Schedule, document, and review records of maintenance and repairs , repair , or replacement  
on system components in accordance with manufacturer or vendor specifications and/or 
organizational requirements;  
b. Approve and monitor  all maintenance activities, whether performed on site or remotely and 
whether the equipment is system or system components a re serviced on site or removed to 
another location;  
c. Require that [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles]  explicitly approve the 
removal of the system or system components from organizational facilities for off -site 
maintenance , repair , or rep lacement ; 
d. Sanitize equipment to remove all information from associated media prior to removal from 
organizational facilities for off -site maintenance, repair , or replacement ; 
e. Check all potentially impacted security and privacy controls to verify that the c ontrols are still 
functioning properly following maintenance , repair , or replacement  actions ; and  
f. Include [ Assignment: organization- define d maintenance -related  information ] in 
organizational maintenance records.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control address es the information security aspects of the system 
maintenance program  and applies to all types of maintenance to any system component ( hardware, 
firmware,  applications) conducted by any local or nonlocal entity  (e.g., in -contract, warranty , in-
house, softw are maintenance agreement). . System maintenance also includes those components 
not directly associated with information processing and/or data or information retention such as scanners, copiers, and printers. Information necessary for creating effective maintenance records 
includes, for example, date and time of maintenance; name of individuals or group performing the 
maintenance; name of escort, if necessary; a description of the maintenance performed; and 
system components or equipment removed or replaced  (including identification numbers, if 
applicable). The level of detail included in maintenance records can be informed by the security 
categories of organizational systems. Organizations consider supply chain issues associated with 
replacement components for systems.  
Related Controls :  CM-3, CM -4, CM -5, MA -4, MP-6, PE-16, SA -12, SA -19, SI-2. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CONTROLLED MAINTENANCE | RECORD CONTENT  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MA -2].  
(2) CONTROLLED MAINTENANCE | AUTOMATED MAINTENAN CE ACTIVITIES  
(a) Employ a utomated mechanisms to schedule, conduct, and document maintenance, repair , 
and replacement actions for the system or system components; and  
(b) Produc e up-to date, accurate, and complete  records of all maintenance, repair , and 
replacement  actions requested, scheduled , in process, and completed . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  MA-3. 
References :  NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
MA-3 MAINTENANCE TOOLS  
 Control : 
a. Approve, contr ol, and monitor the use of system maintenance tools ; and  
b. Review previously approved system maintenance tools [ Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control address es security- related issues associated with  maintenance 
tools that are not within organizational system boundaries but are used specifically for diagnostic 
and repair actions  on organizational systems. Organizations have flexibility in determining roles 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 128 for approval of maintenance tools and how that approval is documented. Periodic review of 
system maintenance tools facilitates withdrawal of the approval for outdated, unsupported, 
irrelevant, or no -longer -used tools. Maintenance tools can include hardware, software, and 
firmware items. Maintenance tools are potent ial vehicles for transporting malicious code , 
intentionally or unintentionally, into a facility and s ubsequently into systems. Maintenance tools 
can include, for example, hardware/software diagnostic test equipment and hardware and software 
packet sniffer s. This control does not cover h ardware or software components that support system 
maintenance  and are a part of the system , for example, the software implementing “ping,” “ls,” 
“ipconfig,” or the hardware and software implementing the monitoring port of an  Ethernet switch.  
Related Controls :  MA-2, PE- 16. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MAINTENANCE TOOLS | INSPECT TOOLS  
Inspect the maintenance tools carried into a facility by maintenance personnel for improper or 
unauthorized modifications.  
Supplemental Guidance :  If, upon inspection of maintenance tools, organizations determine that 
the tools have been modified in an improper/unauthorized manner or contain malicious code, 
the incident is handled consistent with organizational policies and procedures for incident 
hand ling. 
Related Controls :  SI-7. 
(2) MAINTENANCE TOOLS | INSPECT MEDIA  
Check media containing diagnostic and test programs  for malicious code before the media are 
used in the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  If, upon inspection of media containing maintenance di agnostic and 
test programs, organizations determine that the media contain malicious code, the incident is handled consistent with organizational incident handling policies and procedures.  
Related Controls :  SI-3. 
(3) MAINTENANCE TOOLS | PREVENT UNAUTHORIZE D REMOVAL  
Prevent the removal of maintenance equipment containing organizational information by: 
(a) Verifying that there is no organizational information contained on the equipment;  
(b) Sanitizing or destroying the equipment;  
(c) Retaining the equipment within the faci lity; or 
(d) Obtaining an exemption from [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] explicitly 
authorizing removal of the equipment from the facility . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational information includes all information specifically owned 
by organization s and information provided to organization s in which organizations  serve as 
information steward s. 
Related Controls :  MP-6. 
(4) MAINTENANCE TOOLS | RESTRICTED TOOL USE  
Restrict the use of maintenance tools to authorized personnel only.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to systems that are used to carry out 
maintenance functions.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -5, AC -6. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 88. 
MA-4 NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  
 Control : 
a. Approve and monitor  nonlocal maintenance and diagnostic activities;  
b. Allow the use of nonlocal maintenance and diagnostic tools only as consistent with 
organizational policy and documented in the security plan for the system;  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 129 c. Employ strong authenticators in the establishment of nonlocal maintenance and diagnostic 
sessions;  
d. Maintain records for nonlocal maintenance and diagnostic activities; and  
e. Terminate session and network connections when nonlocal m aintenance is completed.     
Supplemental Guidance :  Nonlocal maintenance and diagnostic activities are those activities 
conducted by individuals communicating through a network , either an external netw ork (e.g., the 
Internet)  or an internal network. Local  maintenance and diagnostic activities are those activities 
carried out by individuals physically present at the system or system component and not 
communicating across a network connection . Authentication techniques used in the establishment 
of nonlocal m aintenance and diagnostic sessions reflect the network access requirements in IA -2. 
Strong authentication requires authenticators that are resistant to replay attacks and employ multifactor authentication. Strong authenticators include, for example, PKI where certificates are 
stored on a token protected by a password, passphrase , or biometric.  Enforcing requirements in 
MA-4 is accomplished in part by other controls.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -3, AC-6, AC -17, AU -2, AU -3, IA-2, IA -4, IA -5, IA -8, MA -2, MA -5, 
PL-2, SC -7, SC -10. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | AUDITING AND REVIEW  
(a) Audit [Assignment: organization- defined audit events ] for nonlocal maintenance and 
diagnostic sessions ; and  
(b) Review the records of the maintenance and diagnostic sessions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AU-6, AU -12. 
(2) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | DOCUMENT NONLOCAL M AINTENANCE  
The organization documents  in the security plan for the information system,  the policies and 
procedures for the establishment  and use of nonlocal  maintenance and diagnostic connections . 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MA -1 and MA -4] 
(3) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | COMPARABLE SECURITY AND SANITIZATION  
(a) Require that nonlocal maintenance and diagnostic services be performed from a system that 
implements a secu rity capability comparable to  the capability  implemented on the system 
being serviced; or  
(b) Remove the component to be serviced from the system prior to nonlocal maintenance or 
diagnostic services ; sanitize  the component (for organizational information) before removal 
from organizational facilities ; and after the service is performed, inspect and sanitize the  
component (for potentially malicious software) before reconnecting the component to the 
system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Comparable security capability o n systems, diagnostic tools, and 
equipment providing maintenance services implies that the implemented security controls on 
those systems, tools, and equipment are at least as comprehensive as the controls on the 
system being serviced.  
Related Controls :  MP-6, SI-3, SI -7. 
(4) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | AUTHENTICATION AND SEPARATION OF MAINTENANCE SESSIONS   
Protect nonlocal maintenance sessions by:  
(a) Employing [Assignment: organization -defined authenticators that are replay resistant ]; and 
(b) Separating the maintenance sessions from other network sessions with the system by  either:  
(1) Physically separated communications paths; or  
(2) Logically separated communications paths based upon encryption.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | APPRO VALS AND NOTIFICATIO NS 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 130 (a) Require the approval of each  nonlocal maintenance  session by [ Assignment: organization-
defined personnel  or roles ]; and  
(b) Notify [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] of the date and time of planned 
nonlocal maintenance . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Notification may be performed by maintenance personnel . Approval of 
nonlocal maintenance sessions is accomplished by organizational personnel with sufficient 
information security and system knowledge to determine the appropriatene ss of the proposed 
maintenance.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(6) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION   
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect the integrity and confidentiality of nonlocal 
maintenance and diagnostic communications.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SC-8, SC-13. 
(7) NONLOCAL MAINTENANCE  | REMOTE DISCONNECT V ERIFICATION   
Implement  remote disconnect verification at the termination of nonlocal maintenance and 
diagnostic sessions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Remote disconnect ver ification  ensures  that remote connection s from 
nonlocal maintenance sessions  have been terminated and are no longer available for use.  
Related Controls :  AC-12. 
References :  FIPS Publication s 140-2, 197, 201; NIST Special  Publications 800-63, 800-88. 
MA-5 MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL         
 Control : 
a. Establish a process for maintenance personnel authorization and maintains  a list of authorized 
maintenance organizations or personnel;  
b. Verify that non -escorted personnel performing  maintenance on the system  possess the  
required access authorizations ; and 
c. Designate organizational personnel with required access authorizations and  technical 
competence to supervise the maintenance activities of personnel who do not possess the 
required access authorizations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to  individuals performing hardware or software 
maintenance on organizational systems, while PE -2 addresses physical access for individuals 
whose maintenance duties place them within the physical protecti on perimeter of the systems  (e.g., 
custodial staff, physical plant maintenance personnel). . Technical competence of supervising 
indiv iduals relates to the maintenance performed on the systems  while having required access 
authorizations refers to maintenance on and near the system s. Individuals not previously identified 
as authorized maintenance personnel , such as information technology manufacturers, vendor s, 
systems integrators, and consultants, may require privileged access to organizational system s, for 
example, when required to conduct maintenance activi ties with little or no notice. Based on 
organizational assessment s of risk, organ ization s may issue temporary credentials to these 
individuals. Temporary credentials may be for one -time use or f or very limited time -periods.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -3, AC -5, AC -6, IA -2, IA-8, MA-4, MP -2, PE- 2, PE -3, PS -7, RA -3. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MAINTENANCE PERSONNE L | INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT  APPROPRIATE ACCESS  
(a) Implement  procedures  for the use of maintenance personnel that lack appropriate security 
clearances or are not U.S. citizens, that include the following requirements : 
(1) Maintenance personnel who do not have needed access authorizations, clearances, or 
formal access approvals are escorted and supervised during the performance of 
maintenance and diagnostic activities on the system by approved organizational 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 131 personnel who are fully cleared, have appr opriate access authorizations, and are 
technically qualified;  
(2) Prior to initiating maintenance or diagnostic activities by personnel who do not have 
needed access authorizations, clearances or formal access approvals, all volatile 
information storage components within the system are sanitized and all nonvolatile 
storage media are removed or physically disconnected from the system and secured; and  
(b) Develop and implement alternate security safeguards i n the event a system component 
cannot be sanitized, removed,  or disconnected from the system . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement denies  individuals who lack appropriate 
security clearances (i.e., individuals who do not possess security clearances or possess 
security clearances at a lower level than required) or who are not U.S. citizens, visual and 
electronic acces s to any classified or controlled unclassified information  contained on  
organizational  system s. Procedures for the use of maintenance personnel can be documented 
in security plan s for the sys tems. 
Related Controls :  MP-6, PL -2. 
(2) MAINTENANCE PERSONNE L | SECURITY CLEARANCES FOR CLASSIFIED SYST EMS  
Verify  that personnel performing maintenance and diagnostic activities on a system processing, 
storing, or transmitting classified information possess security clearances and formal access 
approvals  for at least the highest classification level and for all compartments of information on 
the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  PS-3. 
(3) MAINTENANCE PERSONNE L | CITIZENSHIP REQUIRE MENTS FOR  CLASSIFIED SYSTEMS   
Verify  that personnel performing maintenance and diagnostic activities on a system processing, 
storing, or transmitting classified information are U.S. citizens.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  PS-3. 
(4) MAINTENANCE PERSON NEL | FOREIGN NATIONALS   
Verify  that:  
(a) Foreign nationals with appropriate security clearances are used to conduct maintenance and 
diagnostic activities on classified  system s only when the  system s are jointly owned and 
operated by the United States  and forei gn allied governments, or owned and operated solely 
by foreign allied governments; and 
(b) Approvals, consents, and detailed operational conditions regarding the use of foreign 
nationals to conduct maintenance and diagnostic activities on classified system s are fully 
documented within Memoranda  of Agreement s. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  PS-3. 
(5) MAINTENANCE PERSONNE L | NONSYSTEM -RELATED NON-SYSTEM  MAINTENANCE  
Verify  that non- escorted personnel performing maintenance activities not directly associated with 
the system but in the physical proximity of the system, have required access authorizations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Personnel performing maintenance activities in other capacities not 
directly related to the system include, for example, physi cal plant personnel and janitorial 
personnel.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
MA-6 TIMELY MAINTENANCE  
 Control :  Obtain maintenance support and/or spare parts for [ Assignment: organization- defined 
system components ] within [ Assignment: organization -defined time -period] of failure.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s specif y the system components that  result in increased risk 
to organization al operations and assets , individuals, other organizations, or the Nation when  the 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 132 functionality provided by those  component s is not operational . Organizational actions to obtain 
maintenance support typically include having appropriate contracts in place.  
Related Controls :  CM-8, CP-2, CP-7, RA -7, SA -12, SA -15, SI -13. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TIMELY MAINTENANCE | PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE  
Perform preventive maintenance on [ Assignment: organization -defined system components] at 
[Assignment: organization- defined time intervals] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Preventive maintenance includes proactive care and servicing  of 
system  components to maintain  equipment and facilities in satisfactory operating condition . 
Such maintenance provides  for the systematic inspection, tests,  measurements, adjustments, 
parts replacement, detection, and correction of incipient failures either b efore they occur or 
before they develop into major defects.  The primary goal of preventive maintenance is to 
avoid/ mitigate the consequences of equipment failure s. Preventive maintenance  is designed to 
preserve and restore equipment reliability by replacin g worn components before they fail. 
Methods of determining what preventive (or other) failure management  policies to apply 
include, for example,  original equipment manufacturer recommendations,  statistical failure 
records,  requirements of codes , legislatio n, or regulations  within a jurisdiction, expert 
opinion, maintenance that has already been conducted on  simila r equipment, or measured 
values and performance indications.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) TIMELY MAINTENANCE | PREDICTIVE MAINTENA NCE 
Perform predicti ve maintenance on [Assignment: organization -defined system components] at 
[Assignment: organization- defined time intervals] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Predictive maintenance, or condition -based maintenance, attempts to 
evaluate the condition of equipment by performing periodic or continuous (online) equipment 
condition monitoring. The goal of  predictive maintenance is to perform maintenance at a 
scheduled point in time when the maintenance activity is most cost- effective and before the 
equipment loses perform ance within a threshold . The predictive component of predictive 
maintenance stems from the goal of predicting the future trend of the equipment's condition. This approach uses principles of statistical process control to determine at what point in the 
future maintenance activities will be appropriate. Most predictive maintenance inspections are 
performed while equipment is in service, thereby minimizing disruption of normal system 
operations. Predictive maintenance can result in substantial cost savings and  higher system 
reliability. Predictive maintenance tends to include measurement of the item. To evaluate 
equipment condition, predictive maintenance utilizes nondestructive testing technologies such as infrared, acoustic (partial discharge and airborne ult rasonic), corona detection, vibration 
analysis, sound level measurements, oil analysis, and other specific online tests.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) TIMELY MAINTENANCE | AUTOMATED SUPPORT F OR PREDICTIVE MAINTE NANCE  
Employ automated mechanisms  to transfer pred ictive maintenance data to a computerized 
maintenance management system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  A computerized maintenance managem ent system maintains a 
computer database of information about  the maintenance operations of organizations and 
automates processing equipment condition data to  trigger maintenance planning, execution,  
and reporting.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) TIMELY MAINTENANCE | ADEQUATE SUPPLY  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] to ensure an adequate supply of 
[Assignment: organizati on-defined critical system components] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Adversaries can attempt to impede organizational operations by 
disrupting the supply of critical system components or corrupting supplier operations. 
Organizations may track syst ems and component mean time to failure to mitigate the loss of 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 133 temporary or permanent system function. Safeguards to ensure that adequate supplies of 
critical system components include, for example , the use of multiple suppliers throughout the 
supply chain for the identified critical components; stockpiling spare components to ensure 
operation during mission -critical times, and the identification of functionally -identical or 
similar components which may be used , if necessary.  
Related Controls :  SA-12, SA -19. 
References :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 134 3.11   MEDIA PROTECTION  
Quick link to Media Protection summary table  
MP-1 MEDIA PROTECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or 
roles ]: 
1. A media protection  policy that: 
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulati ons, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the media protection  policy and the 
associated media protection  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
media protection policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  media protection: 
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the media protection  procedures implement the media protection  policy and 
controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the media protection 
policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective im plementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the MP 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unn ecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be estab lished for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for  
particular information  systems, if needed.  The organizational risk management strategy is a key 
factor in establishing policy  and procedures . Related control:Procedures describe how pol icies or 
controls are implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the 
procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more 
separate documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an 
organizational policy or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 135 MP-2 MEDIA ACCESS  
Control :  Restrict access to [ Assignment: organization- defined types of digital and/or  non-digital 
media ] to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  System media includes both digital and non -digital media . Digital media 
includes, for example,  diskettes, magnetic tapes, external/removable hard disk drives, flash  drives, 
compact disks, and digital video disks . Non-digital media  includes, for example,  paper  and 
microfilm.  Restricting non -digital media access includes, for example, denying access to patient 
medical records in a community hospital unless the individuals seeking access to such records are 
authorized healthcare providers. Restricting access to digital media includes, for example, limiting 
access to design specifications stored on compact disks in the media library to the project leader 
and the individuals on the development team.  
Related Controls :  AC-19, AU -9, CP -2, CP -9, CP -10, MA -5, MP -6, MP-4, PE-2, PE-3, SC-13, SC -
34, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MEDIA ACCESS | AUTOMATED RESTRICTE D ACCESS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -4(2)]. 
(2) MEDIA ACCESS | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTE CTION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -28(1) ]. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800- 111. 
MP-3 MEDIA MARKING  
Control : 
a. Mark  system media indicating the distribution limitations, handling caveats , and applicable 
security markings (if any) of the information; and  
b. Exempt [ Assignment: organization- defined types  of system media ] from marking if  the media  
remain within [ Assignme nt: organization- defined  controlled areas ].   
Supplemental Guidance :  Security marking refers to the application  or use of human -readable 
security attributes. S ecurity labeling refers to the application  or use of security attributes regarding  
internal data  structures within syste ms (see AC-16). Information . System media includes both 
digital and non -digital media . Digital media includes, for example, diskettes, magnetic tapes, 
external  or removable hard disk drives, flash  drives, compact disks , and digital v ideo disks. N on-
digital media  includes, for example,  paper  and microfilm.  Security m arking is generally not 
required for media containing information determined by organizations  to be in the public domain 
or to be publicly releasable . However, s ome organizations  may require markings for public 
information indicating that the information is publicly releasable . Marking of system media 
reflects applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and 
guidance.  guidelines . 
Related Controls :  AC-16, CP -9, MP -5, PE-22, SI-12.   
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 199. 
MP-4 MEDIA STORAGE  
Control : 
a. Physically control and securely store [ Assignment: organization- defined types of digital 
and/or  non-digital media ] within [ Assignment: organization -defined controlled areas ]; and 
b. Protect system media until the media are destroyed or sanitized using approved equipment, techniques, and procedures . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 136 Supplemental Guidance :  System media includes both digital and non -digital media . Digital media 
includes, for example,  diskettes, magnetic tapes, external  or removable hard disk drives, flash  
drives, compact disks, and digital video disks . Non-digital m edia includes, for example, paper and 
microfilm. Physically controlling system media includes, for example, conducting inventories, 
ensuring procedures are in place to allow individuals to check out and return media to the media 
library, and maintaining accountability for stored media. Secure storage includes, for example, a 
locked drawer, desk, or cabinet ; or a controlled media library. The type of media storage employed 
by organizations is commensurate with the security category or classification of the in formation 
residing on the media . Controlled area s are areas  that provide  sufficient physical  and procedural 
safeguards  to meet the requirements established for protecting informat ion and systems. For media 
containing information determined to be in the pub lic domain, to be publicly releasable, or to have 
limited or no adverse impact on  organization s or individuals if accessed by ot her than authorized 
personnel, fewer safeguards may be needed. In these situations, physical access controls provide adequate pr otection.  
Related Controls :  AC-19, CP -2, CP-6, CP -9, CP-10, MP-2, MP-7, PE-3, PL-2, SC -13, SC -28, SC -
34, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MEDIA STORAGE | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTE CTION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -28(1) ]. 
(2) MEDIA STORAGE | AUTOMATED RESTRICTE D ACCESS  
Employ automated mechanisms to restrict access to media storage areas and to audit access 
attempts and access granted . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms can include, for example, keypads or card 
readers on the external entries to media st orage areas.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AU-2, AU -6, AU -9, AU -12, PE -3. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800- 56A, 800-56B, 800-56C, 800-
57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-3, 800-111. 
MP-5 MEDIA TRANSPORT  
Control : 
a. Protect and control [ Assignment: organization- defined types of system  media ] during transport 
outside of controlled areas using [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards ]; 
b. Maintain accountability for system media during transport outside of controlled areas;  
c. Document activities associated with the transport of system media; and 
d. Restrict the activities associated with the transport of system  media to authorized personnel.  
Supplemental Guidance :  System media includes both digital and non -digital media . Digital media 
includes, for example,  diskettes, magnetic tapes,  externa l/removable hard disk  drives, flash  drives, 
compact disks, and digital video disks . Non-digital media  includes, for example, microfilm and 
paper. This control also applies to mobile devices with information storage capability (e.g., smart 
phones, tablets, E -readers), that are transported outside of controlled  areas. Controlled area s are 
areas  or spaces  for which organization s provide sufficient physical  or procedural safeguards  to 
meet requirements established for protecting information and  system s.   
Physi cal and  technical safeguards  for media are commensurate with the security category or 
classification of the information residing on the media. Safeguards to protect media during 
transport include, for example, locked containers and cryptography. Cryptographic mechanisms 
can provide confidentiality and integrity protections depending upon the mechanisms used.  
Activities associated with transport include the actual transport as well as  those activities such as 
releasing media for transport and ensuring that m edia enters the appropriate transport processes. 
For the actual transport, a uthorized transport and courier personnel may include individuals from 
outside the organization  (e.g., U.S. Postal Service  or a commercial transport or delivery service). . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 137 Maintain ing accountability of media during transport includes, for example, restricting transport 
activities to authorized personnel, and  tracking and/or obtaining explicit records of transport 
activities as the media moves  through the transportation system to pre vent and detect loss, 
destruction, or tampering.  Organizations establish documentation requirements for activities 
associated with the transport of system media in accordance with organizational assessment s of 
risk to include the flexibility to define diff erent record -keeping methods for  the different types of 
media transport as part of an overall system of transport- related records . 
Related Controls :  AC-7, AC-19, CP-2, CP-9, MP -3, MP -4, PE -16, PL -2, SC -13, SC -28, SC -34. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MEDIA TRANSPO RT | PROTECTION OUTSIDE OF CONTROLLED AREAS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -5]. 
(2) MEDIA TRANSPORT | DOCUMENTATION OF ACTIVITIES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -5]. 
(3) MEDIA TRANSPORT | CUSTODIANS  
Employ an identified custodian during transport of system  media outside of controlled areas . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Identified custodians provide organizations with specific points of 
contact during the media transport process and facilitate individual accountability. Custodial 
responsibilities can be transferred f rom one individual to another if  an unambiguous custodian 
is identified at all times.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) MEDIA TRANSPORT | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTE CTION  
The information system implements  cryptographic mechanisms to protect the confidentiality and 
integri ty of information stored on digital media during transport outside of controlled areas.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to both portable storage devices  
(e.g., USB memory sticks, compact disks, digital video disks, external /removab le hard disk 
drives) and mobile devices with storage capability (e.g., smart phones, tablets, E -readers ). 
Related control: MP -2. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -28(1) ]. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800- 60-1, 800-60-2. 
MP-6 MEDIA SANITIZATION  
Control : 
a. Sanitize [Assignment: organization- defined system media ] prior to disposal, release out of 
organizational control, or release for reuse using [ Assignment: organization- defined 
sanitization techniques and procedures ] in ac cordance with applicable  federal  and 
organizational  standards and policies ;]; and 
b. Employ sanitization mechanisms with the strength and integrity commensurate with the 
security category or classification of the information . 
Supplemental Guidance :   This control applies to all system media , both digital and non -digital, 
subject to disposal or reuse, whether or not the media is considered removable. Examples include : 
digital media found in scanners , copiers, printers, notebook computers, workstations, network 
components, mobile devices ; and non -digital media such as paper and microfilm . The s anitization 
process removes  information from the media such that the information cannot be retrieved or 
reconstructed.  Sanitization techniques, including clearing, purging,  cryptographic erase, and 
destruction , prevent the disclosure of information to unauthorized individuals when such media is 
reused or released for disposal. Organizations determine the appropriate sanitization methods recognizing that destruction is someti mes necessary when other methods cannot be applied to 
media requiring sanitization. Organizations use discretion on the employment of approved sanitization techniques and procedures for media containing information deemed to be in the public domain or publ icly releasable, or deemed to have no adverse impact on organizations or 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 138 individuals if released for reuse or disposal . Sanitization of non -digital media includes, for 
example , destruction , removing a classified appendix from an otherwise unclassified docu ment, or 
redacting selected sections or words from a document by obscuring the redacted sections  or words 
in a manner equivalent in effectiveness to removing them from the document . NARA policy and 
guidance control the sanitization process for controlled u nclassified information.  NSA standards 
and policies control the sanitization process for media containing classified information.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -7, AU -11, MA -2, MA -3, MA -4, MA -5, SI -12, SI -18. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MEDIA SANITIZATION | REVIEW , APPROVE , TRACK , DOCUMENT , AND VERIFY  
Review, approve, track, document, and verif y media sanitization and disposal actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations review and approve media to be sanitized to ensure 
compliance with records -retention policies . Tracking and documenting actions include, for 
example, listing personnel who reviewed and approved sanitization and disposal acti ons; 
types of media sanitized;  specific files stored on the media; sanitization methods used; date 
and time of the sanitization a ctions; personnel who performed the sanitiz ation; verification 
actions taken; personnel  who performed the verification;  and the disposal action s taken. 
Organizations verify that the sanitization of the media was effective prior to disposal.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) MEDIA SANITIZATION | EQUIPMENT TESTING  
Test sanitization equipment and procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]  to 
verify that the intended sanitization is being achieved . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Testing of sanitization equipm ent and procedures may be conducted by 
qualified and authorized external entities  including, for example, federal agencies or external 
service providers.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) MEDIA SANITIZATION | NONDESTRUCTIVE TECHNIQUES  
Apply nondestructive sanitization techniques to portable  storage devices prior to connecting such 
devices to the system under the following circumstances: [ Assignment: organization- defined 
circumstances requiring sanitization of portable storage devices].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to digital media containing classified 
information  and Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI). Portable  storage devices can be 
the source of malicious code insertions into organ izational systems. Many of these devices are 
obtained from unknown and potentially untrustworthy sources and may contain malicious 
code that can be readily transferred to system s through USB  ports or other entry portals. 
While scanning such storage devices is always recommended, sanitization provides ad ditional 
assurance that such devices are  free of malicious code to include code capable of initiating 
zero-day attacks. . Organizations consider nondestructive sanitization of portable  storage 
devices  when suchthese  devices are first purchased from manufact urers or vendor s prior to 
initial use or when organization s losecannot maintain  a positive chain of cus tody for the 
devices.   
Related control: SI -3Controls :  None . 
(4) MEDIA SANITIZATION | CONTROLLED UNCLASSI FIED INFORMATION  
 
(1) MEDIA SANITIZATION | CLASSIFIED IN FORMATION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -6]. 
(5) MEDIA SANITIZATION | MEDIA DESTRUCTION CLASSIFIED INFORMATI ON  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -6]. 
(6) MEDIA SANITIZATION | MEDIA DESTRUCTION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -6]. 
(6)(7)  MEDIA SANITIZATION | DUAL AUTHORI ZATION  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 139 Enforce dual authorization  for the sanitization of [ Assignment: organization -defined system 
media ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations employ dual authorization to ensure  that system media 
sanitization cannot occur unless two technically qualifi ed individual s conduct the designated 
task. Individuals sanitizing system media possess sufficient skill s and expertise to determine if 
the proposed sanitization reflects applicable federal and organizational standards, policies, 
and procedures . Dual autho rization also helps to ensure that sanitization occurs as intended, 
both protecting against errors and false claims of having performed the sanitization actions. 
Dual authorization may also be known as two -person control.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, MP -2. 
(7)(8)  MED IA SANITIZATION | REMOTE PURGING OR WIPING OF INFORMATION  
Provide the capability to purge or wipe information from [ Assignment: organization- defined 
systems or system components , or devices]  either remotely or under the following conditions: 
[Assignment: o rganization -defined conditions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement protects data/ information on  organizational 
systems and system components , or devices (e.g., mobile devices ) if such systems or 
components , or devices  are obtained by unautho rized individuals.  Remote purge/wipe 
commands require strong authentication to mitigate the risk of unauthorized individuals  
purging/wiping the system/component/device. The purge or wipe function can be 
implemented in a variety of ways including, for example, by overwriting data /information 
multiple times or by destroying the key necessary to decrypt encrypted  data.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(9) MEDIA SANITIZATION | DESTRUCTION OF PERSO NALLY IDENTIFIABLE I NFORMATION   
Facilitate the destruction of personally identifiable information by:  
(a) De-identifying the personally identifiable information;  
(b) Proactively reviewing med ia to actively find personally identifi able information and removing 
such information ; and  
(c) Reviewing media as it is being archived or disposed to find and remove personally identifiable 
information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Disposal or destruction of media containing personally identifiable 
information applies to originals , copies , and archived records, including system logs that may 
contain such information. De -identification is the general term for any process of removing 
the association between a set of i dentifying data and the data subject  and is accomplished in a 
manner that prevents loss, theft, misuse, or unauthorized access.  
Related Controls :  SI-20. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800- 60-1, 800-60-2, 800-88, 800-
124; NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
MP-7 MEDIA USE  
Control : 
a. [Selection: Restrict; Prohibit ] the use of  [Assignment: organization- defined types of system  
media ] on [Assignment: organization- define d systems or system components ] using 
[Assignment: organization -defined security safeguards ]; and  
b. Prohibit the use of portable storage devices in organizational systems when such devices have 
no identifiable owner . 
Supplemental Guidance :  System media includes digital and non -digital media . Digital media 
includes, for example, diskettes, magnetic tapes, external  or removable hard disk  drives, flash  
drives, compact disks , and digital video disks. N on-digital media  includes, for example,  paper  and 
microfilm.  This control also applies to mobile devices with information s torage capability  (e.g., 
smart phones, tablets, E -readers ).. In contrast to MP -2, which restricts user access to media, this 
control restricts the use of certain types of media on systems, for example, restricting/prohibiting 
the use of flash drives or exter nal hard disk drives.  Organizations can employ technical and 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 140 nontechnical safeguards (e.g., policies, procedures, rules of behavior) to restrict the use of system 
media. Organizations may restrict the use of portable storage devices, for example, by using 
physical cages on workstations to prohibit access to certain external ports, or disabling or 
removing the ability to insert, read or write to such devices. Organizations may also limit the use 
of portable storage devices to only approved devices including,  for example, devices provided by 
the organization, devices provided by other approved organizations, and devices that are not personally owned. Finally, organizations may restrict the use of portable storage devices based on the type of device, for exampl e, prohibiting the use of writeable, portable storage devices, and 
implementing this restriction by disabling or removing the capability to write to such devices.  
Requiring i dentifiable owner s for portable storage devices  reduces the risk of using such devices 
by allowing organizations to assign responsibility for addressing known vulnerabilities in the 
devices . 
Related Controls :  AC-19, AC -20, PL -4, PM -12, SC -34, SC -41. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MEDIA USE | PROHIBIT USE WITHOU T OWNER  
The organization prohibit s the use of portable storage devices in organizational information 
systems when such devices have no identifiable owner.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Requiring i dentifiable owner s (e.g., individual s, organization s, or 
project s) for portable storage devices  reduces the risk of using such technolog ies by allowing 
organizations to assign responsibility and accountability for addressing known vulnerabilities 
in the devices  (e.g., malicious code insertion).  Related control: PL -4. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -7]. 
(2) MEDIA USE | PROHIBIT USE OF SAN ITIZATION -RESISTANT MEDIA  
Prohibit the use of sanitization -resistant media in organizatio nal systems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Sanitization -resistance refers to non -destructive sanitization techniques 
and applies to the cap ability to purge information from media. Certain types of media do not 
support sanitize commands, or if supported, the interfaces are not supported in a standardized 
way across these devices. Sanitization -resistant media include, for example, compact flash , 
embedded flash on boards and devices, solid state drives, and USB removable media.  
Related Controls :  MP-6. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800- 111. 
MP-8 MEDIA DOWNGRADING  
Control : 
a. Establish [Assignment: organization- defined system media downgrading process ] that 
includes employing downgrading mechanisms with [Assig nment: organization -defined 
strength and integrity];  commensurate with the security category or classification of the 
information ; 
b. Verify that the system media downgrading process is commensu rate with the security 
category and/or classification level of th e information to be removed  and the access 
authorizations of the potential recipients of the downgraded infor mation ; 
c. Identif y [Assignment: organization- defined system media  requiring downgrading] ; and 
d. Downgrade  the identified  system media  using the establi shed process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to all system media , digital and non -digital, subject to 
release outside of t he organization, whether the media is considered removable  or not removeable . 
The d owngrading process , when applied to s ystem media, remove s information  from the media, 
typically by security category or classification level, such that the information cannot be retrieved 
or reconstructed. Downgrading of media includes redacting information to enable wider release 
and distrib ution. Downgrading of media It also ensures that e mpty space on the media (e.g., slack 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 141 space within files)  is devoid of information.  
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MEDIA DOWNGRADING | DOCUMENTATION OF PR OCESS  
Document system media downgrading actions.  
Supplemental G uidance :  Organizations can document the media downgrading process by 
providing information such as the downgrading technique employed, the identification 
number of the downgraded media, and the identity of the individual that authorized and/or performed t he downgrading action.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) MEDIA DOWNGRADING | EQUIPMENT TESTING  
The organization employs [ Assignment: organization- defined tests ] ofTest downgrading equipment 
and procedures to verify correct performance [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]. ] to 
verify that intended downgrading actions are being achieved . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) MEDIA DOWNGRADING | CONTROLLED UNCLASSI FIED INFORMATION  
Downgrade system media containing [Assignment: organization -defined Controlled Unclassified 
Information (CUI)]  prior to public release in accordance with applicable federal  and organizational  
standards and policies.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) MEDIA DOWNGRADING | CLASSIFIED INFORMAT ION 
Downgrade system media containing classified information prior to release to individuals  without 
required access authorizations  in accordance with NSA standards and policies.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Downgrading of classified information uses approved sanitizat ion 
tools, techniques, and procedures to transfer information confirmed to be unclassified from 
classified systems to unclassified media.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None .  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 142 3.12   PRIVACY AUTHORIZA TION 
Quick link to P rivacy Authorization summary table  
PA-1 PRIVACY AUTHORIZATION  POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A privacy authorization policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles,  responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the i mple mentation of the privacy authorization policy and 
associated privacy authorization  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
privacy authorization policy and procedures;  
c. Review and update the cur rent privacy authorization:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the privacy authorization procedures effectively implement the privacy 
authorization policy and contro ls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the privacy 
authorization policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of the controls and control enhancements in the PA family. The risk 
management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures. Comprehensive 
policy and procedures help provide security and privacy assurance. Security and privacy program 
policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need for system -specific policies 
and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the general security and privacy 
policy or can be represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex nat ure of organizations. 
The procedures can be established for security and privacy programs and for systems, if needed.  
Procedures describe how policies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the personnel 
or role that is the object of the proced ure. Procedures can be documented in system security and 
privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. It is important to recognize that restating 
controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PA-2, PM-9, PS -8, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of the controls and control enhancements in the PA family. The risk 
management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures. Comprehensive 
policy and procedures help provide security and privacy assurance. Security and privacy program 
policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need for system -specific policies 
and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the general security and privacy 
policy or can be represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex nature of organizations. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 143 The procedures can be established for security and privacy programs and for systems, if needed.  
Procedures describe how po licies or controls are implemented and can be directed at the personnel 
or role that is the object of the procedure. Procedures can be documented in system security and 
privacy plans or in one or more separate documents. It is important to recognize that r estating 
controls does not constitute an organizational policy or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PA-2, PM-9, PS -8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
PA-2 AUTHORITY TO COLLECT  
Control :  Determine and document the legal authority that permits the collection, use, maintenance, 
and sharing of personally identifiable information, either generally or in support of a specific 
program or system need.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Prior to  collecting personally identifiable information , organizations 
determine whether the collection of such information  is legal ly authorized. Organizationa l officials  
consult with the Senior Agency Official for Privacy  and legal counsel regarding the authority of 
any program or activity to collect personally identifiable information . The authority to col lect 
personally identifiable information  is documented in the System of Records Notice and/or Privacy 
Impact Assessment or other applicable documentation such as Privacy Act Statements or 
Computer Matching Agreements.  
Related Controls :  IP-4, IP -6, PA-1, PA -3, PM-9, PM-20, PM -25, RA -8, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
PA-3 PURPOSE SPECIFICATION  
Control :  Identify and document  the purpose (s) for which personally identifiable information is 
collected, used, maintained, and shared in its privacy notices.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Statutory  language often expressly authorizes specific collections and uses 
of personally identifiable information . When statutory language is written broadly and thus subject 
to interpretation, organizations consult with the Senior Agency Official for Privacy  and legal  
counsel to verify that there is a clos e nexus between the general authorization and any specific 
collection of personally identifiable information . Once the specific purpose has been identified, the 
purpose  is clearly described in the related privacy comp liance documentation, includi ng, for 
example, Privacy Impact Assessments, System of Records Notices, and Privacy Act Statements 
provided at the time of collection including, for example, on forms organizations use to collect 
personally identifiable informa tion. Further, in ord er to avoid unauthorized collections or uses of 
personally identifiable information , personnel who manage  such information  receive role-based 
training as specified in AT -3. 
Related Controls :  IP-4, IP -5, IP -6, PA -2, PA -4, PM -9, PM -20, PM-26, RA -8, SC-43, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :   
(1) PURPOSE SPECIFICATIO N | USAGE RESTRICTIONS O F PERSONALLY IDENTIF IABLE INFORMATION  
Restrict the use of personally identifiable information to only the authorized purpose(s) consistent 
with applicable laws o r regulations and/or in public notices.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations take steps to help ensure that personally identifiable 
information  is used only for legally authorized purposes and in a manner,  compatible with the 
uses identified in the Privac y Act and/or in public notices. These steps include , for example, 
monitoring and aud iting organizational use of personally identifiable information  and training 
organizational personn el on the authorized uses of such information . With guidance from the 
Senior Ag ency Official for Privacy and where appropriate, legal counsel, organizations 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 144 document the processes an d procedures for evaluating the proposed new uses of personally 
identifiable information to assess whether such uses  fall within the scope of the o rganizational 
authorities. Where appropriate, organizations obtain consent fro m individuals for the new uses  
of personally identifiable information . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) PURPOSE SPECIFICATIO N | AUTOMATION   
Employ  automated mechanisms to support records  management of aut horizing policies and 
procedures for personally identifiable information . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms may be used to support records management 
of authorizing policies and procedures for person ally identifiable informatio n. Automated 
mechanisms augment verification that organizational policies and procedures are enforced for 
the management and tracking of person ally identifiable information  within an organizatio n’s 
systems.  
Related Controls :  CA-6, CM -12, IP-5, PM- 29, PM-23, SC-16, SC-43, SI-12, SI -10, SI -15, SI -
20, SI -19. 
References :  None. 
PA-4 INFORMATION SHARING WITH EXTERNAL PARTIES  
 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate guidelines to [ Assignment: organization- defined 
personnel or roles ] for the sharing of personally  identifiable information externally, only for 
the authorized purposes identified in the Privacy Act a nd/or described in its notices , or for a 
purpose that is compatible with those purposes;   
b. Evaluate proposed new instances of sharing personally ide ntifiable in formation with external  
parties to assess whether:  
1.  The sharing is authorized ; and 
2.  Additional or new public notice is required ; 
c. Enter into information sharing agreements with external  parties that specifically : 
1. Describe the personally identifiable informa tion covered ;  
2. Enumerate the purpose(s)  for which the personally identifiable information  may be used ; 
and 
3. Include security requirements consistent with the information being shared ; and 
d. Monitor  and audit the authorized sharing of personally identifiable information  with external  
parties . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The Senior Agency Official for Privacy  and where appropriate, legal 
counsel , review and approve proposed external sharing of personally identifiable information , 
including with other public, interna tional, or private sector entities, for  consistency with the uses 
described in the existing organizational public notice(s). Formal agreements for information 
sharing include, for example, Memoranda of Understanding, Letters of Intent, Memoranda of 
Agreeme nt, and Computer Matching Agreements . When a proposed new instance of external 
sharing of personally identifiable information  is not currently authorized by the Privacy Act and/or 
specified in a notice, organizations evaluate whether the proposed  external sharing is compatible 
with the purpose(s) specified in the notice. If the proposed sharing is compatible, organizations 
review, update, and republish the Privacy Impact Assessments, System of Records Notices, 
website privacy policies, and other public notices, if any, to include specific descriptions of the 
new use(s) and obtain consent where appropriate and feasible.   
Related Controls :  IP-4, PM-25.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 145 Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 146 3.13   PHYSICAL AND ENVI RONMENTAL PROTECTION  
Quick link to Physical and Environmental Protection summary table  
PE-1 PHYSICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A phy sical and environmental protection policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regu lations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the physical and environmental protection 
policy and the associated physical and environmental protection  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
physical and environmental protection policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  physical and environmental protection:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment:  organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the physical and environmental pr otection procedures implement the physical and 
environmental protection policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the physi cal and 
environmental protection policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of  selected security  the controls and control enhancements in the PE 
family.  The risk management strategy is a n important factor in establishing policy and procedures. 
Comprehensive policy and procedures help provide security and privacy assurance. Security and 
privacy program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need for system -
specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the general 
security and privacy policy or can be represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex 
nature of certain organizations.  The proced ures can be established for security  and privacy 
programs  and for particular systems, if needed.  Procedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an organizational 
policy or procedure.  
Related Controls :  AT-3, PM- 9, PS -8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publicat ions 800-12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
PE-2 PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTHORIZATIONS  
Control : 
a. Develop , approve,  and maintain  a list of individuals  with authorized access to the facility 
where the system resides ; 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 147 b. Issue authorization credentials  for facility access ; 
c. Review  the access list detailing authorized facility access by individuals  [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency ]; and  
d. Remo ve individuals from the facility access list when access is no longer required.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to organizational emplo yees and visitors. Individuals  
(e.g., employees, contract ors, and others)  with permanent physical access aut horization credentials 
are not considered visitors.  Authorization credentials include, for example, badges, identification 
cards, and smart cards.  Organizations determine the strength of authorization credentials needed 
(including level of forge -proof badg es, smart cards,  or identification cards) consistent with federal 
applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, p olicies, standards, policies, and 
procedures guidelines . This control only applies to areas within facilities that have not been 
designated as publicly accessible.  
Related Controls :  AT-3, AU -9, IA -4, MA -5, MP -2, PE-3, PE- 4, PE- 5, PE- 8, PM- 12, PS -3, PS- 4, 
PS-5, PS -6. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTH ORIZATIONS | ACCESS BY POSITION OR ROLE  
Authorize physical access to the facility where the system resides based on position or role.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -3, AC -6. 
(2) PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTH ORIZATIONS | TWO FORMS OF IDENTI FICATION  
Require two forms of identification from [ Assignment: organization- defined list of acceptable forms 
of identification ] for visitor access to the facility where the system resides.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Acceptable forms of  government photo  identification include, for 
example, passports, Personal Identity Verification (PIV ) cards, and drivers’ licenses. For 
gaining access to facilities using automated mechanisms, organizations may use PIV cards, 
key card s, PIN s, and biometrics.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, IA -4, IA -5. 
(3) PHYSICAL ACCESS AUTH ORIZATIONS | RESTRICT UNESCORTED ACCESS  
Restrict unescorted access to the facility  where the system resides to personnel with [ Selection 
(one or more): security clearances for all info rmation contained within the system;  formal access 
authorizations for all information contained within the syst em; need for access to all information 
contained within  the system; [ Assignment: organization- defined cr edentials]].   
Supplemental Guidance :  Due to the highly sensitive nature of classified information stored 
within certain facilities, it is important tha t individuals lacking sufficient security clearances, 
access approvals, or need to know, be escorted by individuals with appropriate credentials to ensure that such information is not exposed or otherwise compromised.  
Related Controls :  PS-2, PS -6. 
References :  FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publication s 800-76, 800-73, 800-78. 
PE-3 PHYSICAL ACCESS CONTROL  
Control : 
a. Enforce physical access authorizations at [ Assignmen t: organization- defined entry  and exit 
points to the facility where the system resides ] by; 
1. Verifying  individual access authorizations before granting access to the facility;  and 
2. Controlling  ingress  and egress to the facility using [ Selection (one or more) : 
[Assignment: organization -defined physical access control systems or devices ]; guards ]; 
b. Maintain physical access audit logs for [ Assignment: organization- defined entry/exit points ]; 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 148 c. Provide [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards ] to contro l access to areas 
within the facility designated as publicly accessible;  
d. Escort visitors and monitor visitor activity [ Assignment: organization- defined circumstances 
requiring visitor escorts and monitoring];  
e. Secure keys, combinations, and other physical access devices;  
f. Inventor y [Assignment: organization- defined physical access devices ] every  [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency ]; and  
g. Change combinations and keys [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] and /or when 
keys are lost, combinations ar e compromised, or individuals are transferred or terminated.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to organizational employees and visitors. Individuals  
(e.g., employees, contractors, and others)  with permanent physical access authorization credenti als 
are not considered visitors.  Organizations determine  the types of facility guards needed including, 
for example, professional physical security staff  or other personnel such as , administrative staff , or 
system users . Physical access devices include, fo r example, keys, locks, combinations, and card 
readers . Safeguards for publicly accessible areas within organizational facilities include,  for 
example, cameras, monitoring by guards, and isolating selected information systems  and/or 
system components in se cured areas. Physical access control systems comply with applicable 
federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidance. The 
Federal Identity, Credential, and Access Management Program provides implementation guidance 
for identity, credential, and access management  capabilities for  physical access control 
systems .guidelines . Organizations have flexibility in the types of audit logs employed. Audit logs 
can be procedural  (e.g., a written log  of individuals accessing the  facility  and when such access 
occurred), , automated  (e.g., capturing ID provided by a PIV card), , or some combination thereof. 
Physical access points can include facility access points, interior access points to systems or  
system  components requiring supp lemental access controls, or both. Components of 
organizational  systems (e.g., workstations, terminals) may be located  in areas designated as 
publicly accessible with organizations safeguarding access to such devices.  
Related Controls :  AT-3, AU-2, AU -6, AU-9, AU -13, CP -10, IA -3, IA -8, MA -5, MP-2, MP -4, PE- 2, 
PE-4, PE- 5, PE- 8, PS -2, PS -3, PS -7, RA -3, SA -19, SC -28, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PHYSICAL ACCESS CONT ROL | SYSTEM ACCESS  
Enforce physical access authorizations to the system in addition to the phy sical access controls 
for the facility  at [Assignment: organization- defined physical spaces containing one or more 
components of the system ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement provide s additional physical security for 
those areas within faci lities where there is a concentration of (e.g., server rooms, media 
storage areas, data and communications centers system components . 
Related Controls :  PS-2. 
(2) PHYSICAL ACCESS CONT ROL | FACILITY AND SYSTEM BOUNDARIES  
Perform security checks [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] at the physical boundary of 
the facility or system for exfiltration of information or removal of system components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations determine t he extent , frequency , and/or randomness of  
security  checks to adequately mitigate risk associated with exfiltration.  
Related Controls :  AC -4, SC -7. 
(3) PHYSICAL ACCESS CONT ROL | CONTINUOUS GUARDS / ALARMS / MONITORING  
Employ guards  to control  [Assignment: organization  and/or alarms  to monitor  every -defined 
physical access points]  to the facility where the system resides 24 hours per day, 7 days per week.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CP-6, CP -7, PE- 6. 
(4) PHYSICAL ACCESS CONT ROL | LOCKABLE CASINGS  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 149 Use lockable physical casings to protect [ Assignment: orga nization- defined system components ] 
from unauthorized physical access.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) PHYSICAL ACCESS CONT ROL | TAMPER PROTECTION  
Employ  [Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] to [ Selection (one or m ore): 
detect; prevent ] physical tampering or alteration of [ Assignment: organization -defined hardware 
components ] within the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations implement tamper detection and prevention at selected 
hardware components or tamper d etection at some components and tamper prevention at other 
components. Tamper Such detection  and prevention activities can employ many types  of anti -
tamper technologies  including , for example, tamper -detection seals and anti -tamper coatings. 
Anti-tamper pro grams help to detect hardware alterations through counterfeiting and other 
supply chain- related risks.  
Related Controls :  SA-12, SA -16, SA -18. 
(6) PHYSICAL ACCESS CONT ROL | FACILITY PENETRATIO N TESTING  
The organization employs a penetration testing process th at includes [ Assignment: organization-
defined frequency] , unannounced attempts to bypass or circumvent security controls associated 
with physical access points to the facilit y. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CA-8]. 
(7)    PHYSICAL ACCESS CON TROL | PHYSICAL BARRIERS   
Limit access using physical barriers.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Physical barriers include, for example, bollards, concrete slabs, jersey 
walls, and hydraulic active vehicle barriers . 
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800- 73, 800-76, 800-78, 800-116.  
PE-4 ACCESS CONTROL  FOR TRANSMISSION  MEDIUM  
Control :  The organization controls Control  physical access to [ Assignment: organization -defined  
information  system distribution and transmission lines ] within organizational facilities  using 
[Assignment: organization -defined  securi ty safeguards ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Physical Security safeguards applied to system di stribution and 
transmission lines prevent accidental damage, disruption,  and physical tampering.  Such 
safeguards  may also be  necessary to help prevent eavesdropping o r modification  of unencrypted 
transmissions. Security  safeguards Safeguards  used to control  physical access to system 
distribution and transmission lines include , for example, locked wiring closets; disconnected or 
locked spare jacks; protection of cabling by conduit or cable trays ; and wiretapping sensors . 
Related Controls :  AT-3, IA -4, MP-2, MP -4, PE- 2, PE- 3, PE- 5, PE-9, SC-7, SC -8. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PE-5 ACCESS CONTROL FOR OUTPUT DEVICES  
Control :  Control physical access to i nformation system output from  [Assignment: organization-
defined  output devices ] to prevent unauthorized individuals from obtaining the output.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Controlling physical access to output devices includes, for example, 
placing output device s in locked rooms or other secured areas and allowing access to authorized 
individuals only; placing output devices in locations that can be monitored by organizational 
personnel .; installing monitor or screen filters; and using headphones. Output devices include, for 
example,  monitors,  printers, copiers, scanners, facsimile machines, and audio devices.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 150 Related Controls :  PE-2, PE- 3, PE -4, PE- 18.  
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACCESS CONTROL FOR O UTPUT DEVICES | ACCESS TO OUTPUT BY  AUTHORIZED INDIVIDUALS  
Control s physical access to output from [ Assignment: organization- defined output devices ]; and 
EnsuresVerify  that only authorized individuals receive output from the deviceoutput  devices . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Controlling physical access to selected Methods to en sure only 
authorized individuals receive output from output devices include, for example, placing 
printers, copiers , and facsimile machines in controlled areas with keypad or card reader access 
controls; and limiting access to individuals with certain type s of badges . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) ACCESS CONTROL FOR O UTPUT DEVICES  | ACCESS TO OUTPUT BY  INDIVIDUAL IDENTITY   
The information system : 
Controls physical access to Link individual identity to receipt of output from [ Assignment: 
organization- defined output devices ]; and. 
Links  
(a) Supplemental Guidance :  Methods to link  individual identity to receipt of the output from 
the device.  
Controlling physical access to selected output devices include, for example, installing security 
functionality on printers, copie rs, and facsimile  machines  that, copiers , and printers. Such 
functionality  allows organization s to implement authentication (e.g., using a PIN or hardware 
token) on output device s prior to the release of output to individuals . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) ACCE SS CONTROL FOR OUTPUT DEVICES | MARKING OUTPUT DEVI CES 
Mark [ Assignment: organization -defined system output devices] indicating the appropriate security 
marking of the information permitted to be output from the device.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Outputs devi ces include, for example, printers, monitors, facsimile 
machines, scanners, copiers, and audio devices . This control enhancement is generally 
applicable to information system output devices other than mobiles devices.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
PE-6 MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS  
Control : 
a. Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides to detect and respond to 
physical security inc idents;  
b. Review physical access logs [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ] and upon 
occurrence of [ Assignment: organization- defined events or potential indications of events ]; 
and 
c. Coordinate results of reviews and investigations with the organization al incident response 
capability.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Monitoring of physical access includes publicly accessible areas within 
organizational facilities. This can be accomplished for example, by the employment of guards; the 
use of video surveillance equ ipment such as cameras; or the use of sensor devices . Organizational 
incident response capabilities include i nvestigation s of and response s to detected physical security 
incidents . Security incidents include, for example, a pparent security violations or s uspicious 
physical access activities . Suspicious physical access activities include, for example, accesses 
outside of normal work hours; repeated accesses to areas not normally accessed; accesses for 
unusual lengths of time; and out -of-sequence accesses.  
Related Controls :  AU -6, AU- 9, CA-7, CP -10, IR -4, IR -8. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 151 Control Enhancements : 
(1) MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | INTRUSION ALARMS AND SURVEILLANCE EQUIPMENT   
Monitor physical access to the facility where the system resides using  physical intrusion alarms 
and surve illance equipment.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | AUTOMATED INTRUSION  RECOGNITION AND RESPONSES   
Employ automated mechanisms  to recognize [Assignment: organization- defined classes or types 
of intrusions ] and initiate [ Assignment: organization -defined response actions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SI-4. 
(3) MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | VIDEO SURVEILLANCE   
Employ video surveillance of [ Assignment: organization- defined operational areas]  and retain 
video recordings for [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control  enhancement focuses on recording surveillance video for 
purposes of subsequent review, if circumstances so warrant  (e.g., a break -in detected by other 
means). . It does not require monitoring surveillance video although organizations may choose 
to do so. Note that there may be legal considerations when performing and retaining video 
surveillance, especially if such surveillance is in a public location.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) MONITORING PHYSICAL ACCESS | MONITORING PHYSICAL  ACCESS TO SYSTEMS   
Monitor physical access to the system in addition to the physical access monitoring of the facility 
at [Assignment: organization- defined physical spaces con taining one or more components of the 
system ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement provides additional monitoring for those 
areas within facilities where there is a concentration of system components including, for 
example, server rooms, media storage areas, and communications centers.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
PE-7 VISITOR CONTROL  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into PE-2 and PE -3]. 
PE-8 VISITOR ACCESS RECORDS  
Control : 
a. Maintain visitor access records to the facility where the syste m resides  for [Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period] ; and  
b. Review visitor access records [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Visitor access records include, for example, names and organization s of 
person s visiting ; visitor signature s; form s of identification ; dates of access ; entry and departure 
times; purpose of visit s; and name s and organization s of person s visited.  Visitor  Access records 
are not required for publicly accessible areas.  
Control Enhancements : 
(1) VISITOR  ACCESS RECORDS | AUTOMATED RECORDS M AINTENANCE AND REVIEW   
Employ automated mechanisms  to faci litate the maintenance and review of visitor access records.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) VISITOR ACCESS RECOR DS | PHYSICAL ACCESS REC ORDS 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 152 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into PE -2]. 
References :  None.  
PE-9 POWER EQUIPMENT AND CABLING  
Control :  Protect power equipment and power cabling for the system from damage and destruction.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations determine the types of protection necessary for the power 
equipment and cabling employed at different locations both internal and external to organizational 
facilities and environments of operation. This includes, for example, generators and power cabling 
outside of buildings; interna l cabling and uninterruptable power sources within an office or data 
center; and power sources for self -contained entities such as vehicles and satellites.  
Related Controls :  PE-4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) POWER EQUIPMENT AND CABLING | REDUNDANT CABLING   
Empl oy redundant power cabling paths  that are physically separated by [ Assignment: 
organization- defined distance] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Physically separate and redundant power cables ensure that power 
continues to flow in the event one of the cables is cut or otherwise damaged.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) POWER EQUIPMENT AND CABLING | AUTOMATIC VOLTAGE C ONTROLS   
Employ automatic voltage controls for [ Assignment: organization -defined critical system 
components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Automatic voltage controls  can monitor and control voltage. Such 
controls include, for example, voltage regulators, voltage conditioners, and voltage stabilizers.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-10 EMERGENCY SHUTOFF  
Control : 
a. Provide  the capability of shutting off pow er to the system or individual system component s in 
emergency situations;  
b. Place emergency shutoff switches or devices in [ Assignment: organization- defined location  
by system or system component ] to facilitate safe and easy access for personnel ; and  
c. Protect  emergency power shutoff capability from unauthorized activation . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies primarily to facilities containing concentrations of 
system resources  including, for example, data centers, server rooms, rooms/buildings contain ing 
computer -controlled machinery, and mainframe computer rooms.  
Related Controls :  PE-15. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) EMERGENCY SHUTOFF | ACCIDENTAL AND UNAUTHORIZED ACTIVA TION 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into PE -10]. 
References :  None.  
PE-11 EMERGENCY POWER  
Contr ol:  Provide a short -term uninterruptible power supply to facilitate [ Selection (one or more): 
an orderly shutdown of the system ; transition of the system to long -term alternate power ] in the 
event of a primary power source loss.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 153 Supplemental Guidance :  None. 
Related Controls :  AT-3, CP -2, CP -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) EMERGENCY POWER | LONG -TERM ALTERNATE POWER  SUPPLY  — MINIMAL OPERATIONAL CAPABILITY   
Provide a long -term alternate power supply for the system that can maintain  minimally required 
operational c apability in the event of an extended loss of the primary power source.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement can be satisfied, for example, by using  a 
secondary commercial power supply or other external power supply. The l ong-term alternate 
power supplies for organizational system s are either manually or automatically activated.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) EMERGENCY POWER | LONG -TERM ALTERNATE POWER  SUPPLY  — SELF-CONTAINED  
Provide a long -term alternate power supply for the system that is:  
(a) Self-cont ained ; 
(b) Not reliant on external power generation ; and 
(c) Capable of maintaining [ Selection: minimally required operational capability; full operational 
capability] in the event of an extended loss of the primary power source.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This contr ol enhancement can be satisfied, for example, by using  one 
or more generators with sufficient capacity to meet the needs of the organization. Long -term 
alternate power supplies for  organizational  system s are either manually or automatically 
activated.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-12 EMERGENCY LIGHTING  
Control :  Employ and maintain automatic emergency lighting for the system that activates in the 
event of a power outage or disruption and that covers emergency exits and evacuation routes  
within the facility . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies primarily to facilities containing concentrations of 
system resources  including, for example, data centers, server rooms, and mainframe computer 
rooms.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) EMERGENCY LIGHTING | ESSENTIAL MISSIONS AND BUSINESS FUNCTIONS  
Provide  emergency lighting for all areas within the facility supporting essential missions and 
business functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-13 FIRE PROTECTION  
Control :  Employ and maintain fire suppression and detection devices/systems for the system that 
are supported by an independent energy source.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies primarily to facilities containing co ncentrations of 
system resources  including, for example, data centers, server rooms, and mainframe computer 
rooms.  Fire suppression and detection devices  or systems that may require an independent energy 
source include, for example, sprinkler systems , hand held fire extinguishers , fixed fire hoses, and 
smoke detectors.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 154 Related Controls :  AT-3. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) FIRE PROTECTION | DETECTION DEVICES AND  SYSTEMS  
Employ fire detection devices/systems for the system that activate automatically and notify 
[Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ] and [Assignment: organization- defined 
emergency responders]  in the event of a fire.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can identify specific personnel, roles, and emergency 
responders if individuals on t he notification list need to have appropriate access authorizations 
and/or clearances, for example, to obtain access to facilities where classified operations are 
taking place or where there are systems containing classified information.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) FIRE PROTECTION | AUTOMATIC SUPPRESSION DEVICES AND SYSTEMS  
(a) Employ fire suppression devices/systems for the system that provide automatic notification of 
any activation to [ Assignment: organization -defined personnel or roles ] and [ Assignment: 
organization -defined emergency responders] ; and 
(b) Employ an automatic fire suppression capability for the system when the facility is not staffed 
on a continuous basis . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can identify specific personnel, roles, and emergency 
responders if individuals on the notification list need to have appropriate access authorizations 
and/or clearances, for example, to obtain access to facilities where classified operations are 
taking place or where there are systems containing classified inf ormation.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) FIRE PROTECTION | AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION  
The organization employs an automatic fire suppression capability  for the information system  
when the facility is  not staffed  on a continuous basis . 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated i nto PE -13(2)]. 
(4) FIRE PROTECTION | INSPECTIONS  
Verify  that the facility undergoes [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]  fire protection  
inspections by authorized and qualified inspectors and resolves identified deficiencies within 
[Assignment: organi zation -defined time -period ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-14 TEMPERATURE AND HUMIDITY CONTROLS  
Control : 
a. Maintain temperature and humidity levels within the facility where the system  resides at 
[Assignment: or ganization -defined acceptable levels ]; and  
b. Monitor temperature and humidity levels [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies primarily to facilities containing concentrations of 
system resources, for example , data centers, server rooms, and mainframe computer rooms . 
Related Controls :  AT-3, CP -2. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TEMPERATURE AND HUMI DITY CONTROLS | AUTOMATIC CONTROLS  
Employs automatic temperature and humidity controls in the facility to prevent fluctuat ions 
potentially harmful to the system . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) TEMPERATURE AND HUMI DITY CONTROLS | MONITORING WITH ALA RMS AND NOTIFICATIONS  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 155 Employ temperature and humidity monitoring that provides an alarm or notification of changes 
potentially harmful to personnel or equipment  to [Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-15 WATER DAMAGE PROTECTION  
Control :  Protect the system from dama ge resulting from water leakage by providing master shutoff 
or isolation valves that are accessible, working properly, and known to key personnel.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies primarily to facilities containing concentrations of 
system reso urces  including, for example, data centers, server rooms, and mainframe computer 
rooms.  Isolation valves can be employed in addition to or in lieu of master shutoff valves to shut 
off water supplies in specific areas of concern, without affecting entire or ganizations.  
Related Controls :  AT-3, PE- 10. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) WATER DAMAGE PROTECT ION | AUTOMATION SUPPORT  
Employ automated mechani sms to detect the presence of water near  the system and alert 
[Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms include, for example, water detection sensors, 
alarms, and notification systems.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-16 DELIVERY AND REMOVAL  
Control :  Authorize, monitor, and control [ Assignment: organiz ation -defined types of system 
components ] entering and exiting the facility and maintain records of those items.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Effectively Enforcing authorizations for entry and exit of system 
components may require restricting access to delivery  areas and possibly isolating the areas from 
the system  and media libraries .  
Related Controls :  CM-3, MA -2, MA -3, MP -5, SA -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
PE-17 ALTERNATE WORK SITE  
Control : 
a. Determine and document the [ Assignment: organization -defined alternate work sites ] allowed 
for use by employees;  
a.b. Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined security and privacy controls ] at alternate work 
sites;  
b.c. Assess es as feasible,  the effectiveness of security and privacy controls at alternate  work sites; 
and 
c.d. Provide a means for employees to communicate with information security and privacy 
personnel in case of security or privacy incidents or problems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Alternate work sites include , for example,  government facilities or pr ivate 
residences of employees. W hile distinct from alternativ e processing sites , alternate work sites can  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 156 provide  readily available alternate location s during contingency operations.  Organization s can 
define different sets of controls for specific altern ate work sites or types of sites  depending on the 
work -related activities conducted at those sites . This control supports the contingency planning 
activities of organizations  and the federal telework initiative.  . 
Related Controls :  AC -17, AC -18, CP -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 46. 
PE-18 LOCATION OF SYSTEM COMPONENTS  
Control :  Position system components within the facility to minimize potential damage from 
[Assignment: organization -defined physical and environmental hazards ] and to minimize the 
opportunity for unauthorized access.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Physical and environmental hazards include, for example, fl ooding, fire,  
tornados, earthquakes, hurricanes, acts of terrorism , vandalism, electromagnetic pulse, electrical 
interference, and other forms of incoming electromagnetic radiation.  Organization s also consider 
the location of physical entry points where unauthorized individuals, while not being granted 
access, might nonetheless be in close near system s. Such proximity can increase the potential 
forrisk of  unauthorized access to organizational communications  (e.g., through the use of , 
including, for example, using  wireles s sniffers or microphones . 
Related Controls :  CP-2, PE- 5, PE- 19, PE -20, RA -3. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) LOCATION OF SYSTEM C OMPONENTS | FACILITY SITE  
(a) Plan the location or site of the facility where the system resides considering  physical and 
environmental hazards ; and 
(b) For existing facilities, consider the physical and environmental hazards in the organizational  
risk management  strategy.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  PM-8. 
References :  None.  
PE-19 INFORMATION LEAKAGE  
Control :  Protect the system from information leakage due to electromagnetic signals emanations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Information leakage is the intentional or unintentional release of data or 
information to an untrusted environment from electromagnetic signals emanation s. The s ecurity 
categori es or classifications of system s (with respect to confidentiality) , organizational security 
polic ies, and risk tolerance guide the selection  of controls employed to protect system s against 
information leakage due to electromagnetic signals emanations.  
Related Controls :  AC -18, PE -18, PE -20. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION LEAKAGE | NATIONAL EMISSIONS AND TEMPEST POLICIES AN D PROCEDURES  
Protect system components, associated data communications, and networks in accordance with  
natio nal Emissions and TEMPESTSecurity  policies and procedures  based on the security category 
or classification  of the information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Emissions Security (EMSEC) policies include the former TEMPEST 
policies.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 199. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 157 PE-20 ASSET MONITORING AND TRACKING  
Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined asset location technologies ] to track and 
monitor the location and mo vement of [ Assignment: organization- defined assets ] within 
[Assignment: organization -defined controlled areas ]. 
(1) Ensures that asset location technologies are employed  in accordance with applicable federal 
laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidance.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Asset location technologies can help organizations ensure that critical 
assets, including, for example , vehicles , equipment,  or essential system components remain in 
authorized locations. Organization s consult with the Office of the General Counsel and the Senior 
Agency Official for Privacy (SAOP)/Chief Privacy Officer (CPO) regarding the  deployment and 
use of asset location technologies to address potential privacy concerns.  
Related Controls :  CM -8, PM-8. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PE-21 ELECTROMAGNETIC PULS E PROTECTION  
Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards ] against electromagnetic 
pulse damage for [ Assignment: organization -defined systems and syste m components ].  
Supplemental Guidance :  An electromagnetic pulse (EMP) is a short burst of electromagnetic energy 
that is spread over a range of frequencies. Such energy bursts may be natural or man -made. EMP 
interference may be disruptive or damaging to electronic equipment. Protective measures used to 
mitigate EMP risk include shielding, surge suppressors, ferro -resonant transformers, and earth 
grounding.  
Related Controls :  PE-18, PE -19. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PE-22 COMPONENT MARKING  
Control : Mark  [Assignment: organization- defined system hardware components ] indicating the 
impact or classification level of the information  permitted to be processed, stored, or transmitted 
by the hardware component.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Hardware components that may require marking include, for example, 
input devices marked to indicate the classification of the network to which they are connected or a 
multifunction function printer or copier residing in a classified area. S ecurity marking refers to  the 
application  or use of human- readable security attributes. S ecurity labeling refers to the application  
or use of security attributes regarding internal data structures within syste ms. Security m arking is 
generally not required for hardware components  processing, storing, or transmitting information 
determined by organization s to be in the public domain or to be publicly releasable . However, 
organizations  may require markings for hardware components  processing, storing, or transmitting 
public  information  indicating that such information is publicly releasable . The marking of system 
hardware components reflects applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, 
standards, and guidelines . 
Related Controls :  AC -16, MP -3. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None .
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 158 3.14   PLANNING  
Quick link to Planning summary table  
PL-1 SECURITY PLANNING POLICY AND PROCEDURES   
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles]: 
1. Security and privacy planning policies that:  
(a) Address purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Are consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regu lations, 
policies, standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the security and privacy planning policies 
and the associated security and privacy planning  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior man agement official] to manage the 
security and privacy planning policies and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  security and privacy planning:  
1. Policies [Assignment: organization- defined frequency ]; and  
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined freq uency] ; 
d. Ensure that the security and privacy planning procedures implement the security and privacy 
planning policies and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the planning policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the PL 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance .procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the org anization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security policy for organization sand privacy policies  or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple pol icies reflecting the co mplex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does n ot constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures . or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-18, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
PL-2 SECURITY AND PRIVACY PLAN S 
 Control : 
a. Develop security and privacy plans for the system that:  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 159 1. Are consistent with the organization’s enterprise architecture;  
2. Explicitly define the authorization boundary for the system;  
3. Describe the operational context of the system in terms of miss ions and business 
processes;  
4. Provide the security categorization of the system including supporting rationale;  
5. Describe the operational environment for the system  and relationships with or 
connections to other systems;  
6. Provide an overview of the security a nd privacy requirements for the system;  
7. Identify any relevant overlays, if applicable; 
8. Describe the security  and privacy  controls in place or planned for meeting those 
requirements including a rationale for the tailoring decisions; and  
9. Are reviewed and app roved by the authorizing official or designated representative prior 
to plan implementation;  
b. Distribute copies of the security and privacy plans and communicate  subsequent changes to 
the plans to [ Assig nment: organization- defined personnel or roles];  
c. Revie w the security and privacy plan s [Assignment: organization- defined frequency ];  
d. Update the security and privacy plan s to address changes to the system  and environment of 
operation or problems identified during plan implementation or security and privacy control 
assessments ; and  
e. Protect the security and privacy plans  from unauthorized disclosure and modification . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security and privacy plan s relate  security and privacy requirements to a set 
of security and privacy controls and control enhancements . The plans describe how  the security 
and privacy controls  and control enhancements meet those security and privacy requirements, but 
do not provide detailed, technical description s of the specific design or implementation of the 
controls  and co ntrol enhancements . Security  and privacy  plans contain sufficient information 
(including the specification of parameter  values  for assignment  and selection statements either 
explicitly or by reference) to enable a design and  implementation that is unambigu ously compliant 
with the intent of the plan s and subsequent determination s of risk to organizational operations and 
assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation if the plan is implemented as intended.  
Organizations can also apply tailoring guid ance to the control baselines  in Appendix D and CNSS 
Instruction  1253 to develop overlays  for community -wide use or to address specialized 
requirements, technologies, missions , business applications, or environments of operation  (e.g., 
DoD- tactical, Federal Public Key Infrastructure, or Federal Identity, Credential, and Access 
Management, space operations) . Appendix I provides guidance on developing overlays . 
Security and privacy plans need not be single documents ;. The plans can be a collection of various 
documents including documents that already exist. E ffective security  and privacy plan s make 
extensive use of references  to policies , procedures, and additional documents  including, for 
example, design and implementation specifications where more detailed  information can be 
obtained. This reduces the documentation requirements associated with security and privacy 
programs and maintains the security - and privacy- related information in other established 
management and operational areas including, for example, enterprise architecture, system 
development life cycle, systems engineering, and acquisition. Thus, security and privacy plans do 
not contain detailed contingency plan or incident response plan information but instead provide  
explicitly or by reference,  sufficient information to define wha t needs to be accomplished by those 
plans. 
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -6, AC -14, AC -17, AC -20, CA -2, CA -3, CA -7, CM -9, CP -2, IR -8, 
MA-4, MA -5, MP -4, MP -5, PL -7, PL -8, PM-1, PM -7, PM -8, PM -9, PM-10, PM-11, RA -3, RA -9, 
SA-5, SA-17, SA -22, SI -12. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 160 Control Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM SECURITY PLAN AND PRIVACY PLAN S | CONCEPT OF OPERATIO NS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into PL- 7]. 
(2) SYSTEM SECURITY PLAN AND PRIVACY PLAN S | FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into PL- 8]. 
(3) SYSTEM SECURITY AND PRIVACY PLAN S | PLAN | PLAN /AND COORDINATE WITH OTHER ORGANIZATIONAL 
ENTITIES  
Plan and coordinate security - and privacy -related activities affecting the system with [ Assignment: 
organization- defined individuals or groups ] before conducting such activities to  reduce the impact 
on other organizatio nal entities.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Security - and privacy- related activities include, for example, security 
and privacy assessments, audits  and inspections , hardware and software maintenance, patch 
management, and contingency plan testing.  Advance Planning  and coordination includes 
emergency and nonemergency (i.e., planned or non- urgent unplanned) situations.  The process 
defined by organizations to plan and coordinate security - and privacy -related act ivities can be 
included in security and privacy plans for systems or other documents, as appropriate.  
Related Controls :  CP-4, IR -4.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 18. 
PL-3 SYSTEM SECURITY PLAN UPDATE  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into PL- 2]. 
PL-4 RULES OF BEHAVIOR  
 Control : 
a. Establish and provide  to individuals requiring access to the system, the rules that describe 
their responsibilities and expected behav ior for  information and system usage , security, and 
privacy ; 
b. Receive a signed documented acknowledgment from such individuals,  indicating that they 
have read, understand, and agree to abide by the rules of behavior, before authorizing access 
to information and th e system ; 
c. Review and update the rules of behavior [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ]; and  
d. Require individuals who have signed a previous version of the rules of behavior to read and re-sign [Selection (one or more):  [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]; when the 
rules of behavior are revised or updated. ] 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to organizational users . Organizations  
consider rules of behavior based on individual user roles and responsibilities, differentiat ing, for 
example, between rules that apply to privileged users and rules that apply to the general user 
population. Establishing rules of behavior for some types of non- organizational users including, 
for example, individuals who simply receive data or inf ormation from federal systems, is often not 
feasible given the large number of such users and the limited nature of their interaction s with the 
systems. Rules of behavior for organizational and non- organizational users can also be established 
in AC -8, Syst em Use Notification. PL -4b, the signed documented  acknowledgment portion of the  
control , may be satisfied by the security and privacy awareness training and the role- based 
security and privacy training programs conducted by organizations if such training includes rules 
of behavior. Organizations can use electronic signatures Documented acknowledgements  for 
acknowledging rules of behavior may include, for example, electronic  or physical signatures; and 
electronic agreement check boxes /radio buttons . 
Related Controls :  AC -2, AC -6, AC -8, AC -9, AC -17, AC -18, AC -19, AC -20, AT -2, AT -3, CM -11, 
IA-2, IA -4, IA -5, MP -7, PS -6, PS -8, SA -5, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 161 (1) RULES OF BEHAVIOR | SOCIAL MEDIA AND NETWORKING RESTRICTIONS  
Include in the rules of behavior, explicit restrictions on the use of social  media and networking 
sites and posting organizational information on public  websites.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses rules of behavior related to the 
use of social media and networking sites whe n organizational personnel are using such sites 
for official duties or in the conduct of official business; when organizational information is 
involved in social media and networking transactions; and when personnel are accessing social media and networkin g sites from organizational systems. Organizations also address 
specific rules that prevent unauthorized entities from obtaining , either directly or through 
inference, non -public organizational information  (e.g., from social media and networking sites. 
Exam ples of non -public information include  system account information , and personally 
identifiable information.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800-18. 
PL-5 PRIVACY IMPACT ASSESSMENT  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into RA-8]. 
PL-6 SECURITY -RELATED ACTIVITY PLANNING  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into PL- 2]. 
PL-7 SECURITY CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS  
 Control : 
a. Develop a Concept of Operations (CONOPS) for t he system containing at a 
minimum, describing  how the organization intends to operate the system from the perspective 
of information security  and privacy;  and 
b. Review and update  the CONOPS [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The security and privacy CONOPS may be included in the security or 
privacy plans for the system  or in other system development life cycle documents, as appropriate . 
Changes to the CONOPS are reflected in ongoing updates to the security and privacy plans , the 
security and privacy architectures , and other appropriate organizational documents  (e.g., security 
specifications , including, for example, system development life cycle documents, procurement 
specifications, and systems /security  engineering documents.  
Related Controls :  PL-2, SA-2, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PL-8 INFORMATION SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND PRIVACY ARCHITECTURE S 
 Control : 
a. Develop security and privacy architectures  for the system that:  
1. Describ e the philosophy, require ments, and app roach to be taken for  protecting the 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of organizational information;  
2. Describe the philosophy, requirements, and approach to be taken for  processing 
personally identifiable information;  
2.3. Describe how the security and privacy architectures  are integrated into and support the 
enterprise architecture; and  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 162 3.4. Describe any secu rity and privacy -related  assumptions about, and dependencies on, 
external services ; 
b. Review and update the security and privacy architec tures  [Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency] to reflect updates in the enterprise architecture; and  
c. Ensures thatReflect  planned security and privacy architecture changes are reflected in the 
security and privacy plans , the Concept of Operations (CONO PS), and organizational 
procurements and acquisitions . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses actions taken by organization s in the design and 
development of systems.  The security and privacy architectures  at the individual system level are 
consist ent with and complement the more global, organization -wide security and privacy 
architectures  described in PM -7 that are integral to and developed as part of the enterprise 
architecture. The security and privacy architectures include an architectural descr iption, the 
placement  and allocation of security and privacy functionality (including security and privacy 
controls), s ecurity - and privacy- related information for external interfaces, information being 
exchanged across the interfaces, and the protection m echanisms associated with each interface.  In 
addition, the security and privacy architectures  can include other important security -related 
information, for example, user roles and the access privileges assigned to each role, unique 
security and privacy req uirements, types of information processed, stored, and transmitted by the 
system, restoration priorities of information and system services, and any other specific protection needs.  
In today’s modern computing architectures, it is becoming less common for organizations to 
control all information resources. There may be key dependencies on external information services 
and service providers. Describing such dependencies in the security and privacy architectures  is 
important to developing a comprehensive miss ion and business protection strategy. Establishing, 
developing, documenting, and maintaining  under configuration control, a baseline configuration 
for organizational system s is critical to implementing and maintaining effective security and 
privacy archite cture s. The development of the security and  privacy architectures  is coordinated 
with the Senior Agency Information Security Officer and the Senior Agency Official for Privacy 
(SAOP) /Chief Privacy Officer  (CPO)  to ensure that security and privacy controls needed to 
support security and privacy requirements are identified and effectively implemented.  PL-8 is 
primarily directed at organization s (i.e., internally focused) to help to ensur e that organizations they 
develop security  and privacy architectures  for th e system, and that the architectures are integrated 
with or tightly coupled to the enterprise architecture through the organization- wide security and 
privacy architectures . In contrast,  SA-17 is primarily directed at external information technology 
product / and system developers and integrators  (although SA-17 could be used internally within 
organizations for in -house system development) .. SA-17, which is complementary to PL -8, is 
selected when organizations outsource the development of systems or system co mponents to 
external entities, and there is a need to demonstrate consistency with the organization’s enterprise 
architecture and security and privacy architectures . 
Related Controls :  CM -2, CM -6, PL -2, PL -7, PL- 9, PM -7, PM-29, RA-9, SA -3, SA-5, SA-8, SA -17. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND PRIVACY ARCHITECTURE S | DEFENSE -IN-DEPTH  
Design the security and privacy architectures for the system  using a defense- in-depth approach 
that: 
(a) Allocates [ Assignment: organization- defined securit y and privacy safeguards] to 
[Assignment: organization- defined locations and architectural layers]; and  
(b) Ensures that the allocated security  and privacy  safeguards operate in a coordinated and 
mutually reinforcing manner.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizatio ns strategically allocate security safeguards  (procedura l, 
technical, or both) in the security architecture s o that adversaries must  overcome multiple 
safeguards  to achieve their ob jective. Requiring adversaries  to defeat multiple mechanisms 
makes it m ore difficult to successfully attack critical information resources (i.e., increases 
adversary by increasing the work factor ) and of the adversary. It  also increases the likelihood 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 163 of detection.  The c oordination of allocated safeguards is essential to ensure t hat an attack that 
involves one safeguard  does not create adverse unintended consequences (e.g.,by interfering 
with other safeguards . Examples of such unintended consequences include system  lockout , 
and cascading alarms ) by interfering with another safegua rd.. Placement of security 
safeguards  is a keyan important  activity . Greater asset  requiring thoughtful analysis . The 
criticality or information value merits of the organizational asset is a key consideration in 
providing  additional layering.  Thus , an orga nization may choose  to place anti -virus software  
at organization al boundary layers, email /web servers, notebook computers, and workstations  
to max imize the number of related safeguards adversaries  must penet rate before 
compromising the information and information systems  
Related Controls :  SC-29, SC -36. 
(2) SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND PRIVACY ARCHITECTURE S | SUPPLIER DIVERSITY  
Require that [ Assignment: organization- defined security and privacy safeguards] allocated to 
[Assignment: organization- defined locations a nd architectural layers] are obtained from different 
suppliers.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Different information technology products have  different strengths and 
weaknesses. Providing a broad spectrum of products complements the individual offerings. 
For e xample, vendors offering malicious code protection typically update their products at 
different times, often d eveloping solutions for know n viruses , Trojans, or worms based on  
their priorities  and development schedules. By having different pr oducts at differe nt locations 
(e.g., server, boundary, desktop) t here is an increased likelihood  that at least one will detect 
the malicious code . 
Related Controls :  SA-12, SC -29. 
References :  None . 
PL-9 CENTRAL MANAGEMENT  
 Control :  Centrally manage [ Assignment: organizat ion-defined security and privacy controls and 
related processes ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Central management refers to the organization -wide management and 
implementation of selected security and privacy controls and related processes. This Central 
Manageme nt includes planning, implementing, assessing, authorizing, and monitoring the 
organization -defined, centrally managed security controls and processes. As  the central 
management o f security and privacy controls is generally associated with the concept of c ommon 
control s, such management promotes and facilitates  standardization of control implementations 
and management and judicious use of organizational resources. Centrally -managed controls and 
processes may also meet independence requirements for assessmen ts in support of initial and 
ongoing authorizations to operate and as part of organizational continuous  monitoring. As part of 
the security and privacy control selection process es, organizations determine which controls may 
be suitable for central management based on organizational resources and capabilities. Organizations consider that it may It is not always possible to centrally manage every aspect of a 
security or privacy control. In such cases, the control can be treated as a hybrid co ntrol with the 
control managed and implemented cen trally or at the system level. Those controls and control 
enhancements that are candidates for full or partial central management include, but are not  
limited to: AC -2 (1) (2) (3) (4); AC -17 (1) (2) (3) (9); AC -18 (1) (3) ( 4) (5); AC -19 (4); AC -22; 
AC-23; AT -2 (1) (2); AT -3 (1) (2) (3); AT -4; AU -6 (1) (3) (5) (6) (9); AU -7 (1) (2); AU -11, AU -
13, AU -16, CA -2 (1) (2) (3); CA -3 (1) (2) (3) ; CA-7 (1); CA -9; CM -2 (1) (2); CM -3 (1) (4); CM -
4; CM -6 (1); CM -7 (4) (5); CM -8 (all); CM -9 (1); CM -10; CM -11; CP -7 (all); CP -8 (all); SC -43; 
SI-2; SI -3; SI -7; and SI -8. 
Related Controls :  PL-8, PM -9. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800-37. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 164 PL-10 BASELINE SELECTION  
 Control :  Select a control baseline for the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The selection of an  appropriate control baseline is  determined by  the needs 
of organizational stakeholders. Stakeholder ne eds and concerns consider mission and business 
requirements and  mandates impose d by applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, 
regulations,  standards , and guidelines . For example, the three control baselines in Appendix D  are 
based on the req uirements from the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) and 
the Privacy Act. These requirements, along with the NIST standards and guidelines implementing 
the legislation, require organizations to select one of the control baselines after  the reviewing the 
information  types and the information that is processed, stored, and transmitted on organizational 
systems; analyzing the potential adverse impact or consequences of the loss or compromise of the 
system or information on the organization ’s operations and assets, individuals, other organizations 
or the Nation; and considering the results from organizational and system assessments of risk.  
Nonfederal organizations that are part of other communities of interest including  the U.S. critical 
infrastructure sectors, can develop similar control baselines (using the controls in Chapter Three) 
that represent the needs and concerns of those entities.  
Related Controls :  PL-11, RA -2, RA -3, SA -8. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publications 199, 200; NIST Special Publication s 800-30, 800-37, 800-39, 800-
60-1, 800-60-2, 800-160. 
PL-11 BASELINE TAILORING  
 Control :  Tailor the selected control baseline by applying specified tailoring actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The concept of tailoring allows organizations to specialize or customize a 
set of baseline controls by applying a defined set of tailoring actions. These actions facilitate such 
specialization and customization by allowing organizations to develop security and privacy plans 
that reflect their specific missions and business functions, the environ ments where their systems 
operate, the threats and vulnerabilities that can affect their systems, and any other conditions or 
situations that can impact their mission or business success. The tailoring actions are described in 
Appendix G. Tailoring a contr ol baseline is accomplished by identifying and designating  common 
controls; applying scoping considerations; select ing compensating controls; assigning values to 
control parameters ; supplementing the control baseline with additional controls, as needed; an d 
providing information for control implementation.  The general tailoring actions in Appendix G  
can be supplemented with additional actions based on the needs of organizations. Tailoring actions 
can be applied to the baselines in Appendix D  in accordance w ith the security requirements from 
the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA)  and the privacy requirements from 
the Privacy Act . Alternatively, other communities of interest adopting different control baselines 
can apply the tailoring actio ns in Appendix G  to specialize or customize the controls that represent 
the specific needs and concerns of those entities.  
Related Controls :  PL-10, RA -2, RA -3, RA -9, SA -8, SA -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publications 199, 200; NIST Special Publication s 800-30, 800-37, 800-39, 800-
160. 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 165 3.15   PROGRAM MANAGEMEN T 
Quick link to Program Management summary table  
PM-1 INFORMATION SECURITY PROGRAM PLAN  
Control:  
a. Develop and disseminate an organization -wide informat ion security program plan that:  
1. Provides an overview of the requirements for the security program and a description of 
the security program management controls and common controls in place or planned for meeting those requirements;  
2. Includes the identificat ion and assignment of roles, responsibilities, management 
commitment, coordination among organizational entities, and compliance;  
3. Reflects the coordination among organizational entities responsible for information 
security; and 
4. Is approved by a senior offi cial with responsibility and accountability for the risk being 
incurred to organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, and 
reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation;  
b. Review the organization -wide information security program plan [ Assignment: organization-
defined frequency ]; 
c. Update  the information security program plan to address organizational changes and problems 
identified during plan implementation or control assessments ; and  
d. Protect the info rmation security program plan from unauthorized disclosure and modification . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information security program plan s can be represented in single document s 
or compilation s of documents at the discretion of organization s. The plan s docume nt the program 
management controls and organization -defined common controls. Information security program 
plans provide sufficient information about the program management controls/common controls 
(including specification of parameters for any assignment a nd selection statements either explicitly 
or by reference) to enable implementations that are unambiguously compli ant with the intent of 
the plan s and a determination of the risk to be incurred if the pla ns are  implemented as intended . 
Security plans for i ndividual systems and the organization- wide informatio n security program 
plan, provide complete coverage for all security controls employed within the organization. 
Common controls are documented in an appendix to the organization’s information security 
program plan unless the controls are included in a separate security plan for a system. The 
organization -wide information security program plan will indicate which separate security plans 
contain descriptions of common controls.  
Organizations have the flexi bility to describe common controls in a single  document or in multiple 
documents . For multiple documents , the documents describing common controls are included as 
attachments to the information security program plan.  If the information security program pla n 
contains multiple documents , the organization specifies in each document the organizational 
official or officials responsible for the development, implementation, assessment, authorization, 
and monitoring  of the respective common controls. For example, the Facilities Management 
Office may develop, implement, assess, authorize, and continuously monitor  common physical 
and environmental protection controls from the PE family when such controls are not associated 
with a particular system but instead, support multiple  system s. 
Related Controls :  PL-2, PM-8, PM -12, RA -9, SA -12, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 166 PM-2 INFORMATION SECURITY PROGRAM ROLES  SENIOR INFORMATION SECURITY OFFICER  
Control : 
a. Appoint a Senior Agency  Information Security Officer with the mission and resource s to 
coordinate, develop, implement, and maintain an organization -wide information security 
program;  
b. Appoint a Senior Accountable Official for Risk Management to align information security 
management proceeses with strategic, operational, and budgetary planning procceses; and  
c. Appoint a Risk Executive (function) to view and analyze risk from an organization -wide 
perspective and ensure management of risk is consistent across  the organization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The senior information security of ficer is an organizational official. For 
federal agenc ies (as defined by  applicable laws, Executive Orders, regulations, directives, policies, 
and standards ), this official is the Senior Agency Information Security Officer . Organizations may 
also refer to this official as the Senior Information Security Officer or Chief Information Security 
Officer.  The senior accountable official for risk management leads the risk executive (function) in 
organization -wide risk management activities.  
Related Controls :  None . 
Control  Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 37, 800-39; OMB Memorandum 17 -25. 
PM-3 INFORMATION SECURITY AND PRIVACY RESOURCES  
Control : 
a. Include the resources needed to implement the information security and p rivacy program s in 
capital planning and investment requests and document all exceptions to this requirement;  
b. Employs a business case/Exhibit 300/Exhibit 53 to record the resources required Prepare  
documentation required for addressing information security and privacy programs in capital 
planning and investment requests in accordance w ith applicable laws, Executive Orders, 
directives, policies, regulations, standards ; and  
c. Ensure that information security  resources are available for expenditure as planned. Make 
available for expenditure , the planned information security and privacy resources.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s consider establishing  champions for infor mation security 
and privacy efforts and as part of including the necessary resources, assign  specialized expertise 
and resources as needed. Organizations may designate and empower an Investment Review Board 
or similar group to manage and provide oversight for the information security -and privacy- related 
aspects of the capital planning and investment control process.  
Related Controls :  PM-4, SA -2. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 65. 
PM-4 PLAN OF ACTION AND MILESTONES PROCESS  
Control : 
a. Implement a process to ensure  that plans of action and milestones for the security and privacy 
program s and associated organizational systems : 
1. Are d eveloped and maintained;  
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 167 2. Document the remedial information security and privacy actions to adequately respond to 
risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the 
Nation; and  
3. Are reported in accordance with established  reporting requirements.  
b. Review plans of action and milestones for consistency with the organizational risk management strategy and organization -wide priorities for risk response actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The plan of action and milestones is a key d ocument in the information 
security and privacy program s and is subject to reporting re quirements established by the Office of 
Management and Budget. Organizations view plans of action and milestones from an enterprise -
wide perspective, prioritizing risk r esponse actions and ensuring consistency with the goals and 
objectives of the organization. P lan of action and milestones updates are based on findings from 
control assessments  and continuous monitoring activities.  OMB FISMA reporting guidance 
contains ins tructions regarding organizational plans of action and milestons.  
Related Controls :  CA -5; CA -7, PM- 3, RA-7, SI-12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-37. 
PM-5 SYSTEM INVENTORY  
Control :  Develop and maintain an inventory of organizational  systems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the inventory requirements in FISMA. OMB 
provides guidance on developing systems invento ries and associated reporting requirements.   For 
specific information system inventory reporting requirements, organizaitons consult OMB annual 
FISMA reporting guidance.  This control refers to an organization -wide inventory of systems, not 
system component s as described in CM -8. 
Related Controls :  None . 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
PM-6 INFORMATION SECURITY MEASURES OF PERFORMANCE  
Control :  Develop, monitor, and report on the results of information security and privacy measures 
of performance.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Measures of performance are outcome- based metrics used by an 
organization to measure the effectiveness or efficiency of the information security and privacy 
program s and the security and privacy controls employed in support of the program.  
Related Controls :  CA -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-55, 800-137. 
PM-7 ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE  
Control :  Develop an enterprise architecture with consideration for information security , privacy, 
and the resulting risk to organizational operations  and assets, individuals, other organizations, and 
the Nation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The integration of security and privacy requirements and controls into the 
enterprise architecture ensures that security and privacy considerations are addressed early in the 
system development life cycle and a re directly and explicitly related to the organization’s mission 
and business processes . The process of security and privacy requirements integration also embeds 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 168 into the enterprise architecture, the organization’s security and  privacy architectures consis tent 
with the organizational risk management and information security and privacy strategies . For PM -
7, the security and privacy architectures are developed at a system -of-systems level , representing 
all organizational systems. For PL -8, the security and p rivacy architectures are developed at a 
level representing an individual system . The system -level architectures are consistent with the 
security and privacy architectures defined for the organization. Security and privacy requirements 
and control integration are most effectively accomplished through the rigorous application of the 
Risk Management Framework and supporting security standards and guidelines.   The Federal 
Segment Architecture Methodology  provides guidance on integrating information security 
requirements and security controls into  enterprise architectures.  
Related Controls :  AU -6, PL -2, PL -8, PM-11, RA -2, SA-3, SA -8, SA -17. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 39. 
PM-8 CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN  
Control :  Address information security and privacy issues in the development, documentation, and 
updating of a critical infrastructure and key resources protection plan.  
Supplem ental Guidance :  Protection strategies are based on the prioritization of critical assets and 
resources. The requirement and guidance for defining critical infrastructure and key resources and 
for preparing an associated critical infrastructure protection plan are found in applicable laws, 
Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines . 
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP -4, PE- 18, PL -2, PM-1, PM -9, PM -11, PM-18, RA-3, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  HSPD 7 ; National Infrastructure Protection Plan . 
PM-9 RISK MANAGEMENT STRATEGY  
Control:  
a. Develops a comprehensive strategy to manage:  
1. Security risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and 
the Nation associated with the operation and use of organizational systems;  
2. Privacy risk to individuals resulting from the collection, sharing, storing, transmitting, 
use, and disposal of personally identifiable information ; and 
3. Supply chain risks associated with the development, acquisition, mainten ance, and 
disposal of systems, system components, and system services;  
b. Implement the risk management strategy consistently across the organization; and  
c. Review and update the risk management strategy [ Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency] or as requir ed, to address organizational changes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  An organization -wide risk management strategy includes, for example, an 
expression of the security, privacy, and supply chain risk tolerance for the organization ; acceptable 
risk assessment met hodologies ; security,  privacy, and supply chain risk mitigation strategies ; a 
process for consistently evaluating security, privacy, and supply chain risk across the organization 
with respect to the organization’s risk tolerance ; and approaches for monitor ing risk over time.  
The senior accountable official for risk management (agency head or designated official) aligns 
information security management proceeses with strategic, operational, and budgetary planning 
procceses. The use of a risk executive functio n, led by the senior accountable official for risk 
management,  can facilitate consistent  application of the risk management strategy  organization -
wide. The organization -wide risk management strategy can be informed by security, privacy, and 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 169 supply chain ri sk-related  inputs from other sources, internal and external to the organization , to 
ensure the strategy is both broad -based and comprehensive.  
Related Controls :  All XX-1 Controls, CA -2, CA -5, CA -6, CA -7, IP -1, PA -1, PA -2, PA -3, PL -2, 
PM-8, PM-18, PM -31, PM-32, RA-3, RA -9, SA -4, SA -12, SC -38, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-30, 800-39, 800-161; NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
PM-10 AUTHORIZATION PROCESS  
Control : 
a. Manage the security and privacy  state of organizational systems and the environments in 
which those systems operate through authorization processes;  
b. Designate individuals to fulfill specific roles and responsibilities within the organizational risk 
management process ; and 
c. Integrate the authorization processes into an organization -wide risk management program.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Authorization process es for organizational systems and environments of 
operation require the implementation of an organization- wide risk management process, a  Risk 
Management Framework , and associated security and privacy standards and guidelines.  Specific 
roles  for risk management process es include a risk executive (function) and desig nated authorizing 
official s for each organizational system  and common control provider . The organizational 
authorization processes are integrated with continuous monitoring processes to facilitate ongoing understanding and acceptance of security and privac y risks to organizational operations and assets, 
individuals, other organizations, and the Nation.  
Related Controls :  CA -6, CA -7, PL -2. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 37, 800-39. 
PM-11 MISSION  AND BUSINESS PROCESS DEFINITION  
 Control : 
a. Define organizational mission  and business processes w ith consideration for information 
security and privacy and the resulting risk to organizational operations, organizational assets, 
individuals, other organizations, and the Nation; and  
b. Determine information protection and personally identifiable informatio n processing  needs 
arising from the defined mission  and business processes;  and 
c. Review and revise  the mission and business processes [Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency] , until achievable protection and personally identifiable information processin g 
needs are obtained.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Protection needs are technology -independent, required capabilities to 
counter threats to organizations, individuals, systems, and the Nation through the compromise of information (i.e., loss of confidentiality,  integrity, availability,  or privacy).  Information protection  
and personally identifiable information processing needs are derived from mission and business 
needs defined by the stakeholders in organizations, the mission and business processes defined to meet those needs, and the organizational risk management strategy. Information protection and 
personally identifiable information processing needs determine the required security and privacy 
controls for the organization and the systems supporting the missi on and business processes. 
Inherent in defining the protection  and personally identifiable information processing needs, is an 
understanding of adverse impact or consequences that could result if a compromise of information occurs. The categorization process is used to make such potential impact determinations. Privacy 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 170 risks to individuals can arise from the compromise of personally identifiable information, but they 
can also arise as unintended consequences or a byproduct of authorized processing of inform ation 
at any stage of the data life cycle. Privacy risk assessments are used to prioritize the risks that are 
created for individuals from system processing of personally identifiable information. These risk 
assessments enable the selection of the required  privacy controls for the organization and systems 
supporting the mission and business processes. Mission and business process definitions and the 
associated protection requirements are documented in accordance with organizational policy and 
procedures.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, PL -2, PM-7, PM -8, RA -2, SA-2. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publication 800- 60-1, 800-60-2. 
PM-12 INSIDER THREAT PROGRAM  
 Control :  Implement an insider threat program that inclu des a cross -discipline insider threat incident 
handling team.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations handling classified in formation are required, under 
Executive Order  13587 and the National Policy on Insider Threat, to establish insider threat 
programs. T he standards and guidelines that apply to insider threat programs in classified  
environments can also be employed effectively to improve the security of Controlled Unclassified 
Information in non- national security systems.  Insider threat programs include c ontrols to detect 
and prevent malicious insider activity through the centralized integration and analysis of both 
technical and non -technical information to identify potential insider threat concerns.  A senior 
official is designated by the department or ag ency head as the responsible individual to implement 
and provide oversight for the program. In addition to the centralized integration and analy sis 
capability, insider threat programs as a minimum, prepare departme nt or agency insider threat 
policies and i mplementation plans; conduct host -based user monitoring of individual employee 
activities on government -owned classified computers ; provide insider threat awareness training to 
employees ; receive access to information from all offices within the department  or agency for 
insider threat analysis ; and conduct self -assessments of department  or agency insider threat 
posture.  
Insider threat programs can leverage the existence of incident handling teams that organizations 
may already have in place, such as compute r security incident response teams . Human resources  
records are especially important in this effort, as there is compelling evidence to show that some 
types of insider crimes are often preceded by nontechnical beha viors in the workplace including, 
for exam ple, ongoing patterns of disgruntled behavior and conflicts with coworkers and other 
colleagues. These precursors can better inform and guide organizational officials in more focused, 
targeted monitoring efforts. However, the use of human resource records could raise significant 
concerns for privacy. The participation of a comprehensive legal team, including consultation with 
the senior agency officer for privacy (SAOP), ensures that all monitoring activities are performed 
in accordance with applicable laws , Executive Orders, directives, regulations, polic ies, standards, 
and guidelines.  
Related Controls :  AC -6, AT -2, AU -6, AU -7, AU -10, AU -12, AU -13, CA -7, IA -4, IR -4, MP -7, PE-
2, PM-16, PS-3, PS -4, PS -5, PS-7, PS-8, SC-7, SC -38, SI -4, PM -1, PM -14. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PM-13 SECURITY AND PRIVACY WORKFORCE  
 Control :  Establish a security and privacy workforce development  and improvement program . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security and privacy workforce development and improvement programs  
include, for example , defining the knowledge , skills, and abilities  needed to perform security and 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 171 privacy duties and tasks; developing role-based training programs  for individuals assigned security 
and privacy roles and responsibilities; and  providing standards and guidelines for measuring and 
building individual qualifications for incumbents and applicants for security - and privacy- related 
positions. Such workforce development and improvement programs can also include security and 
privacy career paths to  encourage  security and privacy professionals to advance in the field and fill 
positions with greater responsibility . The programs encourage organizations to fill security - and 
privacy- related positions with qualified personnel. S ecurity and privacy workforce development 
and improvement programs are complementary to organizational security awareness and training 
programs  and focus on developing and institutionalizing the core security and privacy capabilities 
of personnel needed to protect organizational operations, assets, and individuals.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Cyber Workforce Framework . 
PM-14 TESTING, TRAINING, AND MONITORING  
Control : 
a. Implement a p rocess for ensuring that  organizational plans  for conducting security and 
privacy testing, training, and monitoring activities associated with organizational systems : 
1. Are developed and maintained; and  
2. Continue to be executed in a timely manner;  
b. Review test ing, training, and monitoring plans for consistency with the organizational risk 
management strategy and organization -wide priorities for risk response actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control ensures that organizations provide oversight for the secur ity 
and privacy testing, training, and monitoring activities conducted organization -wide and that those 
activities are coordinated. With the growing importance of continuous monitoring programs, the implementation of information security and privacy across  the three tiers of the risk management 
hierarchy and the widespread use of common controls, organizations coordinate and consolidate 
the testing and monitoring activities that are routinely conducted as part of ongoing organizational 
assessments supportin g a variety of security and privacy controls. Security and privacy training 
activities,  while focused on individual systems and specific roles, also necessitate coordination 
across all organizational elements. Testing, training, and monitoring plans and ac tivities are 
informed by current threat and vulnerability assessments.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, CA -7, CP -4, IR -3, PM -12, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-37, 800-39; 800-53A, 800-137. 
PM-15 CONTACTS WITH SECURITY GROUPS AND ASSOCIATIONS 
Control :  Establish and institutionalize contact with selected groups and associations within the 
security and privacy communit ies: 
a. To facilitate ongoing security and privacy education and training for organizational personnel;  
b. To maintain currency  with recommended security and privacy practices, techniques, and 
technologies; and  
c. To share current security-  and privacy- related information including threats, vulnerabilities, 
and incidents.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Ongoing contact with security and privacy groups and associations is of 
paramount importance in an environment of rapid ly changing technolog ies and threats. Sec urity 
and privacy groups and associations include, for example, special interest groups, professional 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 172 associations,  forums, news groups, and  peer groups of security and privacy professionals in 
similar organizations. Organizations select groups and associa tions based on  organizational  
mission s and business functions . Organizations share threat, vulnerability, privacy problems, 
contextual insights, compliance techniques, and incident information consistent with applicable 
laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards, and guidelines . 
Related Controls :  SA-11, SI-5. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PM-16 THREAT AWARENESS PROGRAM  
 Control :  Implement a threat awareness program that includes a cross -organization information -
sharing capability.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Because of the constantly changing and increasing sophistication of 
adversaries, especially the advanced persistent threat (APT), it may be more likely that adversaries 
can successfully breach or compromise organ izational systems . One of the best techniques  to 
address this concern is for organizations to share threat information. This can in clude sharing 
threat events (i.e., tactics, techniques, and procedures) that organizations  have exp erienced, 
mitigations that organizations have  found are effective against certain types of threats, and threat 
intelligence (i.e., indications and warnings about threats that can occur). Threat information 
sharing may be bilateral or multilateral. Examples of bilateral threat sharing include government -
commercial cooperatives and government -government cooperatives. An example of multilateral 
sharing includes  organizations taking part in threat -sharing consortia.  Threat information may be 
highly sensitive requiring special agreements  and protection, or less sensitive and freely shared.  
Related Controls :  IR-4, PM-12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) THREAT AWARENESS PRO GRAM  | AUTOMATED MEANS FOR SHARING THREAT INTEL LIGENCE  
Utilize automated means to maximize the effectiveness of sharing threat i ntelligence information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  To maximize the effectiveness of monitoring , it is important to know 
what threat observables and indicators the sensors need to be searching for. By utilizing well 
established frameworks, services , and autom ated tools , organizations greatly improve their 
ability to rapidly share and feed into monitoring tools , the relevant threat detection signatures.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None . 
PM-17 PROTECTING CONTROLLED UNCLASSIFIED INFORMATION ON EXTERNAL SYSTEMS  
Control : 
a. Establish  policy and procedures to ensure that the requirements for the protectio n of 
Controlled Unclassified Information processed, stored or transmitted on  external systems, are 
implemented in accordance with applicable laws, Executive O rders, directives, policies, 
regulations, and standards . 
b. Update the policy and procedures [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The protection of Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) in nonfederal 
organizations and syst ems is critical to the security of federal operations and assets and the privacy 
of individuals. CUI is defined by the National Archives and Records Administration along with 
the appropriate safeguarding and dissemination requirements for such information and is codified 
in 32 CFR 2002, Controlled Unclassified Information and specifically, for systems external to the 
federal org anization, in 32 CFR 2002.14h. The policy prescribes  the specific use and conditions to 
be implemented in accordance with organizat ional procedures  including, for example, via its 
contracting processes . 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 173 Related Controls :  CA -6, PM -10. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  32 CFR 2002; N IST Special Publication 800- 171; NARA CUI Registry . 
PM-18 PRIVACY PROGRAM PLAN  
Control : 
a. Develop and disseminate an organization -wide privacy program plan that provides an 
overview of the agency’s privacy program, and:  
1. Includes a description of the structure of the privacy program and the resources dedicated 
to the privacy program;  
2. Provides an overview of the requirements for the privacy program and a description of 
the privacy program management controls and common c ontrols in place or planned for 
meeting those requirements;  
3. Includes the role of the Senior Agency Official for Privacy  and the identification and 
assignment of roles of other privacy officials and staff  and their responsibilities ; 
4. Describes  management com mitment, compliance, and the strategic goals and objectives 
of the privacy program;  
5. Reflects coordination among organizational entities responsible for the different aspects 
of privacy; and  
6. Is approved by a  senior official with responsibility and accountab ility for the privacy risk 
being incurred to organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, and 
reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation ; and  
b. Update the plan to address changes in federal privac y laws and policy and organizational 
changes and problems identified during plan implementation or privacy control assessments.  
Supplemental Guidance :  A Privacy program plan is a formal document that provides an overview of 
an organization’s privacy progr am, including a description of the structure of the privacy program, 
the resources dedicated to the privacy program, the role of the Senior Agency Official for Privacy  
and other privacy officials and staff, the strategic goals and objectives of the privacy  program, and 
the program management and common controls in place or planned for meeting applicable privacy 
requirements and managing privacy risks.  
Privacy program plans can be integrated with information security plans or can be represented 
independently, either in a single document or in compilations of documents at the discretion of 
organizations. The plans document the program management controls and organization- defined 
common controls. Privacy program plans provide sufficient information about the pr ogram 
management and common controls (including specification of parameters and assignment and 
selection statements either explicitly or by reference) to enable control implementations that are 
unambiguously compliant with the intent of the plans and a det ermination of the risk incurred if 
the plans are implemented as intended.  
The privacy plans for individual systems and the organization- wide privacy program plan together 
provide complete coverage for all privacy controls employed within the organization. Common 
controls are documented in an appendix to the organization’s privacy program plan unless the 
controls are included in a separate privacy plan for a system. The organization -wide privacy 
program plan indicates which separate privacy plans contain des criptions of privacy controls.  
Organizations have the flexibility to describe common controls in a single document or in multiple 
documents. In the case of multiple documents, the documents describing common controls are 
included as attachments to the priv acy program plan. If the privacy program plan contains multiple 
documents, the organization specifies in each document , the organizational official or officials 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 174 responsible for the development, implementation, assessment, authorization, and monitoring of t he 
respective common controls . 
Related Controls :  PM-8, PM-9, PM-19. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PM-19 PRIVACY PROGRAM ROLES  
Control :  Appoint a Senior Agency Official for Privacy with the authority, mission, accountability, 
and resourc es to coordinate, develop, and implement, applicable privacy requirements and manag e 
privacy risks through the  organization -wide privacy program.  
Supplemental Guidance : The privacy  officer described in this control is an organizational o fficial.  
For feder al agencies, as defined by applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, 
policies, standards, and guidelines, this official is designated as the Senior Agency Official for 
Privacy . Organizations may also refer to this official as  the Chief Pr ivacy  Officer.   
Related Controls :  PM-18, PM-21. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PM-20 SYSTEM OF RECORDS NOTICE  
Control : 
a. Publish System of Records Notices in the Federal Register, subject to required oversight 
processes, for systems contain ing personally identifiable information; and  
b. Keep System of Records Notices current.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations issue System of Records Notices to provide the public notice 
regarding personally identifiable information  collected in a system of r ecords. The Privacy Act 
defines a system of records as a group of any records under the control of any agency from which 
information is retrieved by the name of an individual or by some identifying number, symbol, or 
other  identifier. System of Records Notices explain how the information is used, retained, and may 
be corrected, and whether certain portions of the system are subject to Privacy Act exemptions for 
law enforcement or national security reasons.  
Related Controls :  IP-5, PA-2, PA-3. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PM-21 DISSEMINATION OF PRIVACY PROGRAM INFORMATION  
Control : 
a. Ensure  that the public has access to information about organizational privacy activities and 
can communicate with its Senior Agency  Official for Privacy ; 
b. Ensure that organizational  privacy practices are publicly available through organizational 
websites or otherwise;  and 
c. Employ publicly facing email addresses and/or phone lines to enable the public to provide 
feedback and/or direct questions to privacy offices reg arding privacy practices.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations employ different mechanisms for informing the public about  
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 175 their privacy practices including, for example , Privacy Impact Assessments, System  of Records 
Notices, privacy reports, publicly ava ilable web pages, email distributions,  blogs, a nd periodic 
publications, including, for example, quarterly news letters .  
Related Controls :  IP-4, IP-5, PM-19. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None. 
PM-22 ACCOUNTING OF DISCLOSURES  
Control : 
a. Develop and maintain  an accounting of disclosures of personally identifiable information held 
in each system of records under its control, including:  
1. Date, nature, and purpose of each disclosure of a record; and  
2. Name and address of the person or organization to wh ich the disclosure was made;  
b. Retain  the accounting of disclosures for the life of the record or five years after the disclosure 
is made, whichever is longer; and 
c. Make the accounting of disclosures available to the person named in the record upon request.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses disclosure accounting requirements in the Privacy 
Act. The purpose of disclosure accounting requirements is to allow individuals to learn to whom 
records about them  have been disclosed; to provide a basis for s ubsequently advising recipients of 
records of any corrected or disputed records; and to provide an audit trail for subsequent reviews 
of organizational compliance with conditions for disclosures. Organizations can use any system 
for keeping notations of di sclosures, if it can construct from such a  system , a document listing of 
all disclosures. Automated mechanisms can be used by organizations to determine when such 
information is disclosed, including, for example,  commercial services providing notificat ions and 
alerts . Accounting of disclosures may also be used to help organization s verify compliance with 
applicable privacy stat utes and policies governing disclosure or dissemination of information and 
dissemination restrictions.  
Related Controls :  AU -2. 
Cont rol Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None .  
PM-23 DATA QUALITY MANAGEMENT  
Control :  Issue  guidelines ensuring and maximizing the quality, utility, objectivity, integrity, impact 
determination, and de- identification of personally identifiable information  across the information 
life cycle.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Data quality management guidelines include the  reasonable steps that 
organizations take to confirm the accuracy and relevance of personally identifiable information  
throughout  the information life c ycle. The information life cycle includes the creation, collection, 
use, processing, storage, maintenance, dissemination, disclosure, and disposition  of personally 
identifiable information. Such steps may include, for example, editing and validating addres ses as 
they are collected or entered into systems using automated address verification look -up application  
programming interfaces. The measures taken to protect data quality are based on the nature and 
context of the personally identifiable information , how it is to be used, how it was obtained, the 
impact level  of the personally identifiable information  obtained,  and potential de -identification 
methods employed. Measures taken to validate the accuracy of personally identifiable information  
that is used to make determinations about the rights, benefits, or privileges of individuals under 
federal programs may be more comprehensive than those used to validate less sensitive personally 
identifiable information . Additional steps may be necessary to validate personally identifiable 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 176 information  that is obtained from sources other than individuals or the authorized representatives 
of individuals.   
Related Controls :  PM-24, SI-20. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DATA QUALITY MANAGEM ENT | AUTOMATION  
Issue technical guidelines and documentation to support automated evaluation of data quality 
across the information life cycle.  
Supplemental Guidance :  As data is obtained and used across the information life cycle, it is 
important to confirm the accuracy and relevance of personally identifiable information.  
Automated tools and techniques can augment existing process and procedures and enable an 
organization to  better identify and manage personally identifiable information in large -scale 
systems. For example, automated tools can greatly improve efforts to consistently normalize 
data or identify malformed da ta. Automated tools can also be used to improve auditing of 
data, to track how data is used across  the information life cycle, and to detect errors  that may 
incorrectly alter person ally identifiable information or incorrectly associate such information 
with the wrong individual. These automa ted capabilities backstop processes and procedures 
at-scale. They also enable more fine -grained detection and correction of data quality errors . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) DATA QUALITY MANAGEM ENT | DATA TAGGING  
Issue data modeling guidelines to support tagging of personally identifiable information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Data tagging includes, for example , tags noting the authority to collect, 
usage, presence of personally identifiable information , de-identification, impact level, and 
information life cycle stage . 
Related Controls :  SC-16. 
(3) DATA QUALITY MANAGEM ENT | UPDATING PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION  
When managing  personally identifiable in formation, develop procedures and incorporate 
mechanisms to identify and r ecord the method under which the information is updated, and the 
frequency that such updates occur.  
Supplemental Guidance :  When managing personally identifiable information includin g, for 
example, health informati on and financial information , it is important to carefully track 
updates or changes to such data. Having  the ability to track both the method and fre quency of 
updates enhances transparency  and individual participation. It also enables individuals to 
better understand how and when their information is changed and helps both individuals and 
the responsible organization s to know how and what personally identifiable information  was 
changed should erroneous information be identifi ed. 
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 188.  
PM-24 DATA MANAGEMENT BOARD  
Control : 
a. Establish a written charter  for a Data Management Board ; 
b. Establish the Data Management Board consisting of [ Assignment: organization -defined roles ] 
with the following responsibilities:  
1. Develop  and implement  guidelines supporting data modeling, quality, integrity, and de -
identification needs of personally identi fiable information  across the information life 
cycle;  
2. Review and approve applications to release d ata outside of the organization, archiving the  
applications and the released data, and performing p ost-release monitoring to ensure  that 
the assumptions made as part of t he data release continue to be valid ; 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 177 c. Include requirements for personnel interaction with the Data Management Board in security 
and privacy awareness and/or role -based training.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The guidelines established by Data Managem ent Board establish policies, 
procedures, and standards that enable data governance so that personally identifiable information 
is managed and maintained in accordance with  any relevant statutes , regulations, and guidance.  
Members may include the Chief Information Officer , Senior Agency Information Security Officer , 
and Senior Agency Official for Privacy . With respect to data modeling, and the quality, integrity, 
and de -identification of personally identifiable information , data and information needs are met 
through organization -wide  data governance policies that establish the roles, responsibilities, and 
processes by which personnel manage information as an asset across the information life cycle. 
The information life cycle includes creation, collection, us e, processing, storage, maintenance, 
dissemination, disclosure, and disposition. Members may include the Chief Information Officer , 
Senior Agency Official for Privacy , and Senior Agency Information Security Officer.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, PM -23, PM-25, SI-4, SI -20. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 188. 
PM-25 DATA INTEGRITY BOARD  
Control :  Establish  a Data Integrity Board to ove rsee organizational Computer Matching 
Agreements.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations  executing Computer Matching Agreements or participating 
in such agreements  with other organizations regarding applicants for and recipients of financial 
assistance or p ayments under federal benefit programs or certain computerized comparisons 
involving federal personnel or payroll records , establish a Data Integrity Board  to oversee and 
coordinate the  implementation of those matching agreements. As data is obtained and u sed across 
the information life  cycle, it is important to confirm the accuracy and relevance of personally 
identifiable information.  Organizations may integrate the function of the Data Integrity Board into 
the responsibilities of the D ata Management Board  under PM -24. In many organizations, the Data 
Integrity Board is led by the Senior Ag ency Official for Privacy . 
Related Controls :  AC-1, AC -3, AC -4, AU -2, AU -3, AU -6, AU- 11, PA-2, PA -4, PM -24, SC -8, SC -
28, SI -19, SI -20. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DATA INTEGRITY  BOARD  | PUBLISH AGREEMENTS O N WEBSITE  
Publish  Computer Matching Agreements on  the public website  of the organization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None .   
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None . 
PM-26 MINIMIZATION OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION  USED IN TESTING, 
TRAINING, AND RESEARCH  
Control : 
a. Develop and implement policies and procedu res that address the use of personally identifiable 
information for internal testing, train ing, and research;  
b. Take measures to limit or minimize the amount of personall y identifiable information used for 
internal testing, training, and r esearch purposes; and  
c. Authorize the use of personally identifiable information when such information is required for 
internal testing, training, and r esearch.  
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 178 Supplemental Guidance : Organizations often use personally identifiable information for testing new 
applications or systems prior to deploym ent, for research purposes , and for training. The use of 
personally identifiable information in testing, research, and training increases risk of  unauthor ized 
disclosure or misuse of such  information. Organizations consult with the Senior Agency Official 
for Privacy  and legal counsel to ensure that the use of personally identifiable information in 
testing, training, and research is compatible with the original purpose for which it was collected. 
When possible, organizations  use placeholder data to  avoid exposure of personally identifiable 
information when conducting testing, training, and research.  
Related Controls :  PA-3. 
Control Enhancements :  None. 
References :  None . 
PM-27 INDIVIDUAL ACCESS CONTROL  
Control : 
a. Publish:  
1. Policies  governing how individuals may request access to records maintained in a Privacy 
Act system of records ; and  
2. Access  procedures in System of Records Notices; and  
b. Ensure that the published policies and access procedures are consistent with Privacy Act 
requirements and Office of Management and Budget policies and guidance for the proper 
processing of Privacy Act requests.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Access affords individuals the abilit y to review personally identifiable 
information about them held within organizational systems of records. Access includes timely, 
simplified, and inexpensive access to data. Organizational processes for allowing access to records 
may differ based on resour ces, legal requirements, or other factors. The Senior Agency Official for 
Privacy  is responsible for the content of Privacy Act regulations and record request processing, in 
consultation with the organization’s legal counsel. Access to certain types of records may not be 
appropriate, however, and heads of agencies may promulgate rules exempting particular systems 
from the access provision of the Privacy Act . 
Related Controls :  IP-6. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None .  
PM-28 COMPLAINT MANAGEMENT  
Control :  Implement  a process for receiving and responding to complaints, concerns, or questions 
from individuals about the organizational privacy practices  that includes:  
a. Mechanisms that are easy to use and readily accessible by the public;  
b. All information necessary for successfully filing complaints; and  
c. Tracking mechanisms to ensure all complaints received are reviewed and appropriately 
addressed in a timely manner.  
Supplemental Guidance : Complaints, concerns, and questions from individuals can serve as  a 
valuable source of external input that ultimately improves operational models, uses of technology, 
data collection practices, and  privacy and security controls . Mechani sms that can be used by the 
public may include,  for example, e- mail, telephone  hotlin e, or web -based forms. Information 
necessary for successfully filing complaints includes, for example, contact information for the 
Senior Agency Official for Privacy  or other official d esignated to receive complaints . 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 179 Related Controls :  IP-3, IR -7, IR-9. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None .  
PM-29 INVENTORY OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION  
Control : 
a. Establish, maintain, and update [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] an inventory of 
all pro grams and systems that create, collect, us e, process, store, maintain, disseminate, 
disclose, or dispose of personal ly identifiable information;  
b. Provide updates  of the personally identifiable information inventory to the  Chief Information 
Officer, Senior Agency Official for Privacy, and Senior Age ncy Information Security Officer 
[Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]; 
c. Use the personally identifiable information inventory to support the establishment of 
information security and privacy requirements for all new or modified systems containing 
personall y identifiable information;  
d. Review the personally identifiable information inventory  [Assignment: organization- defined 
frequency];  
e. Ensure to the extent practicable, that personally identifiable information is accurate, relevant, 
timely, and complete; and 
f. Reduce personally identifiable information to the minimum necessary for the proper 
performance of authorized organizational  functions . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Orga nizations coordinate with federal records officers to ensure that 
reductions in organiz ational holdings of personally identifiable info rmation are consistent with 
National Archives and Records Administration  retention schedules. By performi ng periodic 
assessments, organizations ensure that only the data specified in the notice is collected, and that 
the data collected is still relevant and necessary for the purpose  specified in privacy notices. The 
set of personally identifiable information elements required to  support an organizational  mission 
or business process may be a subset of the perso nally identifiable information the organization is 
authorized to collect.  
Related Controls :  CM -8, PL-8. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INVENTORY OF PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INF ORMATION  | AUTOMATION SUPPORT  
Employ  automated mechanisms to determine if personally iden tifiable information is maintained in 
electronic form.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated mechanisms include , for example,  commercial services 
providing notifications and alerts to organizations about where personally identifiable 
information is stored.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None . 
PM-30 PRIVACY REPORTING  
Control :  Develop, disseminate, and update privacy reports  to: 
a. The Office of Management and Budget, Congress, and other oversight bodies to demonstrate 
accountability with statutory and regul atory privacy program mandates; and  
b. [Assignment: organization -defined officials ] and other personnel with responsibility for 
monitoring privacy program progress and compliance . 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 180 Supplemental Guidance :  Through internal and external privacy reporting, organi zations promote 
accountability and transparency in organizational privacy operations. Reporting can also help  
organizations to determine progress in meeting privacy compliance requirements and privacy 
controls, compare performance across the federal govern ment, identify vulnerabilities and gaps in 
policy and implementation, and identify success m odels. Privacy reports include, for example, 
annual Senior Agency Official for Privacy reports to OMB; reports to Congress required by the 
Implementing Regulations of the  9/11 Commission Act; and other public reports required by 
specific statutory mandates or internal policies of organizations. The Senior  Agency Official for 
Privacy consults with legal counsel, where appropriate, to ensure that organizations meet all  
applicable privacy reporting requirements.  
Related Controls :  IR-9, PM-19. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
PM-31 SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN  
Control : 
a. Develop a plan  for managing supply chain risks associated with the development, acq uisition, 
maintenance, and disposal of systems, system components, and system services;  
b. Implement the supply chain risk management  plan consistently across the organization; and  
c. Review and update  the supply chain risk management plan [Assignment: organizat ion-defined 
frequency] or as required, to address organizational changes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  An organization -wide supply chain risk management plan  includes, for 
example, an unambiguous expression of the supply chain risk tolerance for the organizatio n, 
acceptable supply chain risk mitigation strategies or controls, a process for consistently evaluating 
and monitoring supply chain risk, approaches for implementing and communicating the supply 
chain risk management plan, and associated roles and respons ibilities. The organization -wide 
supply chain risk management plan  can be incorporated into the organization’s risk management 
strategy  and be used to inform the system -level supply chain risk management plan. The use of a 
risk executive function can facil itate consistent, organization -wide application of the supply chain 
risk management plan. 
Related Controls :  PM-9, SA-12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800-161. 
PM-32 RISK FRAMING  
Control : 
a. Identify assumptions affecting risk assessments, risk response, and risk monitoring;  
b. Identify constraints affecting risk assessments, risk response, and risk monitoring;  
c. Identify the organizational  risk tolerance; and  
d. Identify priorities and trade -offs considered by the organization for managing risk . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Risk framing is most effectively conducted at the organization -wide level. 
The assumptions, constraints, organizational risk tolerance, and priorities and trade- offs identified 
for this control inform the organizational risk management strategy which in turn , informs the 
conduct of risk assessment, risk response, and risk monitoring.  
Related Controls :  CA -7, PM -9, RA -3, RA -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 181 References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 39. 
 
  
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 182 3.16   PERSONNEL SECURIT Y 
Quick link to Personnel Security sum mary table  
PS-1 PERSONNEL SECURITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A personnel security policy that: 
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the personnel  security  policy and the 
associated personnel security  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
personnel security policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  personnel security:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the personnel security procedures implement the personnel security policy and 
controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation act ions for violations of the personnel 
security policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the PS 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable  federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organizat ion level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex na ture of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information sys tems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures or procedure . 
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
PS-2 POSITION RISK DESIGNATION  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 183 a. Assign a risk designati on to all organizational positions;  
b. Establish screening criteria for individuals filling those positions; and  
c. Review and update  position risk designations [ Assignment: organization- defined  frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Position risk designations refl ect Office of Personnel Management policy 
and guidance.  Risk designations can guide and inform the types of authorizations individuals 
receive when accessing organizational information and systems. Position screening criteria include 
explicit information s ecurity  role ap pointment requirements  (e.g., training, security clearances ). . 
Related Controls :  AC -5, AT -3, PE- 2, PE- 3, PL -2, PS -3, PS -6, SA -5, SA -21, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  5 C .F.R. 731.106.  
PS-3 PERSONNEL SCREENING  
 Control : 
a. Screen individuals prior to authorizing access to the system; and  
b. Rescreen individuals in accordance with  [Assignment: organization- defined conditions 
requiring rescreening and, where rescreening is so indicated, the frequency of rescreening].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Personnel s creening and rescreening activities reflect applicable laws, 
Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies , standards, guidelines , and specific criteria 
established for the risk designation s of assigned position s. Organization s may define different 
rescreening conditions and frequencies for personnel accessing system s based on types of 
information processed, stored, or transmitted by the system s. 
Related Controls :  AC -2, IA -4, MA -5, PE- 2, PM -12, PS -2, PS -6, PS -7, SA -21. 
Control E nhancements : 
(1) PERSONNEL SCREENING | CLASSIFIED I NFORMATION  
Verify  that individuals  accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting classified 
information  are cleared and indoctrinated to t he highest classification level of the information  to 
which they have access on the system . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4. 
(2) PERSONNEL SCREENING | FORMAL INDOCTRINATI ON  
Verify  that individuals  accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting types of classified 
information which require formal indoctrination, are formally indoctrinated for all the relevant types 
of information to which they have access on the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Types of classified information requiring formal indoctrination 
include, for example, Speci al Access Program (SAP), Restricted Data (RD), and Sensitive 
Compartment Information  (SCI).  
Related Controls :  AC -3, AC -4. 
(3) PERSONNEL SCREENING | INFORMATION WITH SP ECIAL PROTECTION MEASURES  
Verify  that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, o r transmitting information 
requiring special protection:  
(a) Have valid access authorization s that are demonstrated by assigned official government 
duties; and  
(b) Satisfy [Assignment: organization- defined  additional personnel screening criteria] . 
Supplemental Gui dance :  Organizational information requiring special protection includes, for 
example, Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI ) and Sources and Methods Information 
(SAMI). ). Personnel security criteria include, for example, position sensitivity backgroun d 
screening requirements.  
Related Controls :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 184 (4) PERSONNEL SCREENING | CITIZENSHIP REQUIRE MENTS  
Verify that individuals accessing a system processing, storing, or transmitting [ Assignment: 
organization- defined information types ] meet [Assignment: organi zation -defined citizenship 
requirements ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publications 199, 201; NIST Special Publications 800- 60-1, 800-60-2, 800-73, 
800-76, 800-78. 
PS-4 PERSONNEL TERMINATION  
 Control :  Upon termination of individual employment:  
a. Disable  system access  within [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] ; 
b. Terminate or revoke any authenticators and credent ials associated with the individual;  
c. Conduct exit interviews that include a discussion of [ Assignment: organization -defined 
information security topics ]; 
d. Retrieve all security -related organizational system -related property;  
e. Retain access to organizational information and systems formerly controlled by terminated 
individual ; and  
f. Notify [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ] within [ Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  System -related property includes, for exam ple, hardware authentication 
tokens, system administration technical manuals, keys, identification cards, and building passes.  
Exit interviews ensure that terminated individuals understand the  security constraints imposed by 
being former employees and that  proper accountability is achieved for system -related property. 
Security topics of interest at exit interviews can include, for example, reminding terminated individuals of nondisclosure agreements and potential limitations on future employment. Exit 
interviews may not be possible for some terminated individuals, for example, in cases related to 
job abandonment, illnesses, and unavailability of supervisors. Exit interviews are important for 
individ uals with security clearances. Timely execution of termination actions is essential for 
individuals  terminated for cause.  In certain situations, organizations consider disabling the system 
accounts of individuals that are being terminated prior to the individuals being notified.  
Related Controls :  AC-2, IA -4, PE- 2, PM-12, PS -6, PS -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PERSONNEL TERMINATIO N | POST -EMPLOYMENT REQUIREMENTS  
(a) Notify terminated individuals of applicable, legally binding post -employment requirements for 
the protection of organizational information; and  
(b) Require terminated individuals  to sign an acknowledgment of post -employment requirements 
as part of the organizational termination process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations consult with the Office of the General Counsel 
regarding matters of post -employment requirement s on terminated individuals.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) PERSONNEL TERMINATIO N | AUTOMATED NOTIFICAT ION 
Employ automated mechanisms to notify [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] 
upon termination of an individual.  
Supplemental Guidance :  In o rganizations with many  employees, not all personnel who need to 
know about termination actions receive the appropriate notifications —or, if such notifications 
are received, they may not occur in a timely manner. Automated mechanisms can be used to 
send aut omatic alerts or notifications to specific organizational personnel or roles (e.g., 
management personnel , supervisors , personnel security officers , information security officers, 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 185 systems administrator s, or i nformation technology administrator s) when indivi duals are 
terminated. Such automatic alerts or notifications can be conveyed in a variety of ways, 
including, for example, telephonically, via electronic mail, via text message, or via websites.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
PS-5 PERSONNEL TR ANSFER  
 Control : 
a. Review and confirm ongoing operational need for current logical and physical access 
authorizations to systems  and facilities when individuals  are reassigned or transferred to other 
positions within the organization;  
b. Initiate [ Assignment: organization- defined transfer or reassignment actions ] within 
[Assignment: organization -defined time -period following the formal transfer action] ; 
c. Modify access authorization as needed to correspond with any changes in operational need due to reassignment or transfer; and  
d. Notify [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ] within [ Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies when reassignment s or transfer s of individuals  are 
permanent or of such extende d duration s as to make the actions warranted. O rganization s define 
actions appropriate for the type s of reassignment s or transfer s, whether permanent or extended. 
Actions that may be required for personnel transfer s or reassign ments  to other positions with in 
organization s include, for example,  returning old and issuing new keys, identification cards, and 
building passes; closing system accounts and establishing new accounts; changing system access 
authorizations  (i.e., privileges) ; and providing for access to official records to which individuals 
had access at previous work location s and in previous system accounts.  
Related Controls :  AC -2, IA -4, PE- 2, PM-12, PS-4, PS-7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
PS-6 ACCESS AGREEMENTS  
 Control : 
a. Develop  and document access agreements for organizational systems;  
b. Review  and update the access agreements [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; and  
c. Verify  that individuals requiring access to organizational information and systems :  
1. Sign appropriate access agreements prior to being granted access; and  
2. Re-sign access agreements to maintain access to organizational systems when access 
agreements have been updated or [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Access agreements incl ude, for example, nondisclosure agreements, 
acceptable use agreements, rules of behavior, and conflict -of-interest agreements.  Signed access 
agreements include an acknowledgement that individuals have read, understand, and agree to 
abide by the constraints  associated with  organizational  system s to which access is authorized. 
Organizations can use e lectronic signatures to acknowledg e access agreements unless specifically 
prohibited by organizational policy.  
Related Controls :  AC -17, PE -2, PL-4, PS-2, PS -3, PS-7, PS -8, SA -21, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 186 (1) ACCESS AGREEMENTS | INFORMATION REQUIRI NG SPECIAL PROTECTIO N  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into PS -3]. 
(2) ACCESS AGREEMENTS | CLASSIFIED INFORMAT ION REQUIRING SPECIA L PROTECTION  
ensuresVerify  that access to classifi ed information requiring special protection is granted only to 
individuals who:  
(a) Have a valid access authorization that is demonstrated by assigned official government 
duties;  
(b) Satisfy associated personnel security criteria; and  
(c) Have read, understood, and  signed a nondisclosure agreement.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Classified information requiring special protection include s, for 
example, collateral  information , Special Access Program (SAP) information, and Sensitive 
Compartmented Information (SCI).  Personnel se curity criteria reflect applicable laws, 
Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) ACCESS AGREEMENTS | POST -EMPLOYMENT REQUIREME NTS 
(a) Notify individuals of applicable, legally binding post -employ ment requirements for protection 
of organizational information; and  
(b) Require individuals  to sign an acknowledgment of these requirements , if applicable, as part of 
granting initial access to covered information . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations consult  with the Office of the General Counsel 
regarding matters of post -employment requirements on terminated individuals . 
Related Controls :  PS-4. 
References :  None.  
PS-7 EXTERNAL  PERSONNEL SECURITY 
 Control : 
a. Estab lish personnel security requirements including security roles and responsibilities for 
third -party external  providers;  
b. third -party Require  external  providers to comply with personnel security policies and 
procedures established by the organization;  
c. Document personnel security requirements;  
d. third -party Require  external  providers to notify [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  
or roles ] of any personnel transfers or terminations of third -party external  personnel who 
possess organizational credentials and/or badges, or who have system p rivileges within 
[Assignment: organization -defined time -period] ; and 
e. Monitor provider  compliance.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Third -party External provider  refers to organizations other than the 
organization operating or acquiring the system. External  providers  include, for example, service 
bureaus, contractors, and other organizations providing system development, information 
technology services, outsourced applications, testing/assessment services, and network and 
security management.  Organization s explicitly include personnel security requirements in 
acquisition -related documents.  Third -party External  providers may have personnel working at 
organization al facilities  with credentials , badges , or system privileges issued by organizations. 
Notifications of third -partyexternal  personnel changes ensure appropriate termination of privileges 
and credentials. Organizations define the transfers and terminations deemed reportable by 
security -related characteristics that include, for example, functions, roles, and nature o f 
credentials/privileges associated with individuals transferred or terminated.  
Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, MA -5, PE- 3, PS -2, PS -3, PS -4, PS -5, PS -6, SA -5, SA -9, SA -21. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE     PAGE 187 References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 35. 
PS-8 PERSONNEL SANCTIONS 
 Control : 
a. Employ a formal sanctions process for individuals failing to comply with established 
information security policies and procedures; and  
b. Notify [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] within [ Assignment: 
organization- defined time -period] when a formal employee sanctions process is initiated , 
identifying the individual sanctioned and the reason for the sanction.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational s anctions process es reflect applicable laws, Executive 
Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines. Sanctions p rocess es are 
described in access agreements and can be included as part of general personnel polici es and 
procedures for organization s. Organizations consult with the Office of the General Counsel 
regarding matters of employee sanctions.  
Related Controls :  All XX-1 Controls, IP -1, PL-4, PM-12, PS-6. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 188 3.17   RISK ASSESSMENT  
Quick link to Risk Assessment summary table  
RA-1 RISK ASSESSMENT POLICY AND PROCEDURES   
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A risk assessment p olicy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and gu idelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the risk assessment policy and the 
associated risk assessment controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
risk assessment policy and procedu res; 
b.c. Review and update the current  risk assessment:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the risk as sessment procedures implement the risk assessment policy and contro ls; 
and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the risk assessment 
policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the RA 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive po licy and guidance .procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflecting the comp lex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in sy stem security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures . or procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS -8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
RA-2 SECURITY CATEGORIZATION   
Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 189 a. Categorizes information and the information system in accordance with  applicable  federal 
laws, Executive Orders, dir ectives, policies, regulations, standards , and guidance ; 
a. Categorize the system  and information it proces ses, stores, and transmits;  
b. Document the security categorization results including supporting rationale , in the security 
plan for the system; and  
c. Ensures Verify  that the authorizing official or authorizing official designated representative  
reviews and appr oves the security categorization decision . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Clearly defined authorization boundaries are a prerequisite for effective 
security categorization  decisions . Security categori es describe the potential adverse impacts to 
organizational ope rations, organizational assets, and individuals if organizational  information and 
system s are comprised through a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability.  Organization s 
conduct the security c ategorization process as an organization -wide activit y with the involvement  
of Chief I nform ation O fficer s, Senior information security officer s, informationA gency 
Information Security O fficer s, system owner s, mission  and business  owners, and information 
owners /stewards.  Organization s also consider  the potent ial adverse impacts to other organizations 
and, in accordance with the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 and Homeland Security Presidential 
Directives, potential national -level adverse impacts.  Security categorization process es carried out 
by organizations  facilitate the development  of inventories of information assets, and along with 
CM-8, mappings  to specific system components where information is processed, stored, or 
transmitted.  
Related Controls :  CM -8, MP -4, PL-2, PL -10, PL -11, PM -7, RA -3, RA -5, RA -7, SC-7, SC-38, SI -
12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY CATEGORIZAT ION | SECOND -LEVEL CATEGORIZATION  
Conduct a second- level  categorization of organizational systems to obtain additional granularity 
on system impact levels.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations apply the  “high water mark” concept to each of their 
systems categorized in accordance with FIPS Publication 199. This process results in systems 
designated as low impact, moderate impact, or high impact. Organizations desiring additional 
granularity in the system impact designations for risk- based decision mak ing, can further 
partition the systems into sub -categories of the initial, first -level system categorization. For 
example, a second -level categorization on a moderate- impact system can produce three new 
sub-categories: low -moderate systems, moderate- moderate systems, and high -moderate 
systems. This secondary categorization and the resulting su b-categories of the system give  
organizations an opportunity to further prioritize their investments related to security  control 
selection and the tailoring of control baselines in responding to identified risks. Second -level 
categorization can also be used to determine those systems that are exceptionally critical to 
organizational missions and business operations. These s ystems are sometimes described as 
high-value assets and thus, organizations may be more focused on complexity, aggregation, 
and interconnections. Such systems can be identified by partitioning high -impact systems into 
low-high systems, moderate -high system s, and high -high systems.  
Related Controls :  None . 
 References :  FIPS Publication s 199, 200; NIST Special Public ations 800-30, 800-39, 800-
60-1, 800-60-2. 
RA-3 RISK ASSESSMENT  
Control : 
a. Conduct a risk assessment , including the likelih ood and magni tude of harm, from:  
1. The unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction of the 
system, the information it processes, stores, or transmits , and any related information;  and 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 190 2. Privacy -related  problems for individuals ar ising from the intentional processing of 
personally identifiable information;  
b. Integrate risk assessment results and risk management decsions from the organization and 
missions/business process perspectives with system -level risk assessments;  
b.c. Document risk asse ssment results in [ Selection: security and privacy plans ; risk assessment 
report;  [Assignment: organization- defined document ]]; 
c.d. Review risk assessment results [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency];  
d.e. Disseminate risk assessment results to [ Assignm ent: organization- defined personnel or roles ]; 
and 
e.f. Update the risk assessment  [Assignment: organization- defined frequency] or when there are 
significant changes to the system , its environment of operation  (including the identification of 
new threats and vulnerabilities) ,, or other conditions that may impact the security or privacy 
state of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Clearly defined authorization boundaries are a prerequisite for effective 
risk assessments . Risk assessments consider  threats, vulnera bilities, likelihood, and impact to 
organizational operations  and assets, individuals , other organizations, and the Nation  based on the 
operat ion and use of systems. Risk assessments also take into account risk from external parties  
(e.g., service provider s,including, for example, individuals accessing organizational systems ; 
contractors operating information systems on behalf of the organization, individuals accessing 
organizational information systems, ; service providers ; and outsourcing entities ). In accordance 
with OMB policy and related E -authentication initiatives, authentication of public users accessing 
federal information systems may also be required to protect non public o r privacy -related 
information. As such, organizational assessments of risk als o address  public access to federal  
information systems . 
Organizations can conduct risk assessments, either formal or informal, at all three tiers in the risk 
management hierarchy (i.e., organization level, mission/business process level, or system level) 
and at any phase in the system development life cycle. Risk assessments can also be conducted at 
various steps in the Risk Management Framework, including categorization, control selection, 
control implementation, control assessment, system authorization, a nd security control monitoring. 
RA-3 is noteworthy in that the control must be partially implemented prior  to the implementation 
of other controls in order  to complete the first two steps in the Risk Management Framework . Risk 
assessments control monitoring . In addition to the information processed, stored, and transmitted 
by the system, risk assessments can also address any information related to the system including, 
for example, system design , the intended use  of the system , testing results, and other sup ply chain -
related information or artifacts. Assessments of risk  can play an important role in security and 
privacy control selection processes, particularly during the application of tailoring guidance , 
which includes security control supplementation.  . 
Related Controls :  CA -3, CP -6, CP -7, IA -8, MA -5, PE- 3, PE- 18, PL -2, PL-10, PL -11, PM-8, PM -9, 
PM-32, RA-2, RA -5, RA -7, SA -9, SC -38, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) RISK ASSESSMENT | SUPPLY CHAIN RISK ASSESSMENT  
(a) Assess supply chain risks associated with [ Assignm ent: organization- defined systems, 
system components, and system services];  and 
(b) Update  the supply chain risk assessment [ Assignment: organization -defined frequency], when 
there are significant changes to the relevant supply chain, or when changes to the sy stem, 
environment s of operation , or other conditions may necessitate a change in the supply chain . 
Supplemental Guidance:   Supply chain -related events include, for example, disruption, theft,  use 
of defective components, insertion of counterfeits, maliciou s development practices, improper 
deliver y practices, and insertion of malicious code. These events can have a significant impact 
on the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of a system  and its information and therefore, 
can also adversely impact or ganizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 191 reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organ izations, and the Nation. The supply  
chain -related events may be unintentional or malicious and can occur at any point during the 
system life cycle. An analysis of supply chain risk can help an organization identify systems 
or components for which additional supply chain risk mitigations are required.  
Related Controls :  RA -2, RA-9, PM-17, SA -12. 
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-30, 800-39, 800-161; NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
RA-4 RISK ASSESSMENT UPDATE  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into RA -3].  
RA-5 VULNERABILITY SCANNING   
Control : 
a. Scan for vulnerabilities in the system and hosted applications [ Assignment: organization-
defined frequency and/or randomly in accordance with organization- defined process ] and 
when new vulnerabilities potentially affecting the system /applications  are identifi ed and 
reported;  
b. Employ vulnerability scanning tools and techniques that facilitate  interoperability among 
tools and automate parts of the vulnerability management process by using standards for:  
1. Enumerating platforms, software flaws, and improper configur ations;  
2. Formatting checklists and test procedures; and  
3. Measuring vulnerability impact;  
c. Analyze vulnerability scan reports and results from control assessments;  
d. Remediate legitimate vulnerabilities [ Assignment: organization- defined response times ] in 
accor dance with an organizational assessment of risk;  
e. Share information obtained from the vulnerability scanning process and control assessments 
with [Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] to help eliminate similar 
vulnerabilities in other (i.e., systemic weaknesses or deficiencies) .systems ; and  
f. Employ vulnerability scanning tools that include the capability to readily update the 
vulnerabilities to be scanned . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security categorization of information and system s guides the fr equency 
and comprehensiveness of vulnerability scans. Organization s determine the required vulnerability 
scanning for system components, ensuring that the potential sources of vulnerabilities such as 
networked printers , scanners, and copiers are not overlo oked . The vulnerabilities to be scanned 
need to be readily updated as new vulnerabilities are discovered, announced, and scanning 
methods developed. Vulnerability analys es for custom software applications This process helps to 
ensure that potential vulnerab ilities in the system are identified and addressed as quickly as 
possible. Vulnerability analyses for custom software  may require additional approaches  such as 
static analysis, dynamic analysis, binary analysis, or a hybrid of the three approaches. Organiz ations can use these analysis approaches in source code reviews  and in a variety of tools 
including, for example,  web-based application scanners, static analysis tools , and binary  analyzers . 
Vulnerability scanning includes , for example, scanning for patch levels; scanning for functions, 
ports, protocols, and services that should not be accessible to users or devices ; and scanning for 
improperly configured or incorrectly operating information flow control mechanisms.  Scanning 
tools that facilitate interopera bility include, for example, products that are Security Content 
Automated Protocol (SCAP) validated. Thus, o rganization s consider using  scanning  tools that 
express vulnerabilities in the Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) naming convention and that use the Open Vulnerability Assessment Language (OVAL) to determine/ test for  the 
presence of vulnerabilities. Suggested Sources for vulnerability information include , for example,  
the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) listing and the National Vulnerability  Database 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 192 (NVD) . Control assessments such as red team exercises provide additional  source s of potential 
vulnerabilities for which to scan.  Organization s also consider  using scanning tools that express 
vulnerability impact by the Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS).  
Related Controls :  CA -2, CA-7, CM -2, CM -4, CM-6, CM-8, RA -2, RA -3, SA -11, SA -12, SA -15, 
SC-38, SI-2, SI-3, SI -4, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | UPDATE TOOL CAPABIL ITY 
The organization employs v ulnerability scanning tools that include the capability to readily update 
the information system vulnerabilities to be scanned.  
Supplemental Guidance :  [Withdrawn: Incorporated into RA -5]. 
(2) The vulnerabilities to be scanned need to be readily updated as new vulnerabilities are 
discovered, announced, and scanning methods developed. This updating process helps to 
ensure that potential  vulnerabilities in the information system are identified and addressed as 
quickly as possible.  Related controls: SI -3, SI -7. 
(3)(2)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | UPDATE BY FREQUENCY  /, PRIOR TO NEW SCAN , OR WHEN IDENTIFIED  
Update the system vulnerabilities to be scanned [Selection (one or more):  [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency] ; prior to a new scan; when new vulnerabilities are identified and 
reported ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SI-5. 
(4)(3)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | BREADTH AND DEPTH OF COVERAGE   
Employ vulnerability  scanning procedures that can identify  the breadth and depth of coverage.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The identification of the b readth and depth of coverage can include, 
for example, the  system components scanned and the vulnerabilities checked . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(5)(4)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | DISCOVERABLE INFORM ATION   
Determine unintended discoverable  information about the information system is discoverable by 
adversaries and subsequently takestake [Assignment: organization- defined corrective actions] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Discoverable information includes information that adversaries could 
obtain without directly compromisin g or breaching the system, for example, by collecting 
information the system is exposing or by conducting extensive searches of the web. 
Corrective actions can include, for example, notifying appropriate organizational personnel, 
removing designated inform ation, or changing the system to make designated information less 
relevan t or attractive to adversaries.  
Related Controls :  AU -13. 
(6)(5)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | PRIVILEGED ACCESS   
Implements  privileged access authorization to [ Assignment: organization- identifie d system 
components ] for [ Assignment: organization -defined vulnerability scanning activities] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  In certain situations, the nature of the vulnerability scanning may be 
more intrusive or the system component that is the subject of the scann ing may contain highly 
sensitive classified or controlled unclassified  information. Privileged access authorization to 
selected system components facilitates more thorough vulner ability scanning and protects the 
sensitive nature of such scanning.  
Relat ed Controls :  None . 
(7)(6)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | AUTOMATED TREND ANA LYSES   
Employ automated mechanisms  to compare  the results of vulnerability scans over time to 
determine trends in system vulnerabilities.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 193 (8)(7)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | AUTOMATED DETECTION  AND NOTIFICATION OF  UNAUTHORIZED 
COMPONENTS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM -8]. 
(9)(8)  VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | REVIEW HISTORIC AUD IT LOGS  
Review historic audit logs to determine if a vulnerability identified in the system has been 
previously exploited.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AU -6, AU- 11. 
(10)(9) VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | PENETRATION TESTING  AND ANALYSES   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CA -8]. 
(11)(10) VULNERABILITY SCANNI NG | CORRELATE SCANNING INFORMATION   
Correlate the output from vulnerability scanning tools to determine the presence of multi -
vulnerability  and multi- hop attack vectors.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 40, 800-70, 800-115, 800-126; NIST Interagency 
Reports  7788, 8023 . 
RA-6 TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE COUNTERMEASURES SURVEY  
Control :  Employ a technical surveillance countermeasures survey at [ Assignment: organization-
defined locations ] [Selection (one or more): [ Assignment: organizat ion-defined frequency ]; 
[Assignment: organization -defined events or indicators occur ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Technical surveillance countermeasures surveys are performed  by qualified 
personnel . Organizations use such surveys  to detect the presence of technical surveillance devices / 
and hazards and to identify technical security weaknesses that could aid in the conduct of technical 
penetration s of surveyed facilities. SuchIn addition, technical surveillance countermeasures  
surveys provide evaluation s of the technical security postures posture  of organizations and 
facilities and typically include  thorough visual, electronic, and physical examinations  in and 
about of surveyed facilit ies., both internally and externally.  The surveys also provide useful input 
intofor organizational  risk assessments and  critical information regarding  organizational exposure 
to potential adversaries.  
Related Controls :  None.  
Control Enhancements :  None . 
References :  None . 
RA-7 RISK RESPONSE  
 Control :  Respond to findings from secur ity and privacy assessments, monitoring, and audits.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations have a variety of options for responding to risk including: 
mitigating the risk by implementing new controls or strengthening existing controls; accepting the 
risk w ith appropriate justification or rationale; sharing or transferring the risk; or rejecting the risk.  
Organizational risk tolerance influences risk response decisions and actions. Risk response is also 
known as risk treatment . This control addresses the need to determine an appropriate response to 
risk before a plan of action and miles tones entry is generated. For example, the response may be to 
accept risk or reject risk, or it may be possible to mitigate the risk immediately so a plan of action 
and milesto nes entry is not needed. However, if the risk response is to mitigate the risk and the 
mitigation cannot be completed immediately, a plan of action and milestones entry is generated.  
Related Controls :  CA -5, IR-9, PM-4, PM-32, RA-2, RA -3. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 194 References :  FIPS Publications 199, 200; NIST Special Publication s 800-30, 800-37, 800-39, 800-
160. 
RA-8 PRIVACY IMPACT ASSESSMENTS  
Control :  Conduct privacy impact assessments for systems, programs, or other activities that pose a 
privacy risk before:  
a. Developing or procuring information technology that collects, maintains, or disseminates    
information that is in an identifiable form; and  
b. Initiating a new collection of information that:  
1. Will be collected, maintained, or disseminated using informa tion technology; and  
2. Includes information in an identifiable form permitting the physical or online contacting 
of a specific individual, if identical questions have been posed to, or identical repor ting 
requirements imposed on, ten  or more persons, other t han agencies, instrumentalities, or 
employees of the Federal Government.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Privacy impact assessments are an analysis of how information is managed  
to ensure that such management  conforms to applicable legal, regulatory, and policy re quirements 
regarding privacy; to determine the associated privacy risks and effects of creating, collecting, 
using, processing, storing, maintaining, disseminating, disclosing, and disposing of information in 
identifiable form in a system; and to examine a nd evaluate  the protections and alternate processes 
for managing information to mitigate potential privacy concerns. A pr ivacy impact assessment is 
an analysis and a formal document detailing the process and outcome of the analysis.  To conduct 
the analysis , organizations use risk assessment processes. Although privacy impact assessments  
may be  required by law, organizations  may develop policies to require privacy impact assessments  
in circumstances where a privacy impact assessment  would not be required by law.  
Related Controls :  IP-4, PA-2, PA -3, RA-1, RA -3, RA -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
RA-9 CRITICALITY ANALYSIS  
Control :  Identify critical system components and functions by performing a criticality analysis for 
[Assignment: organization -defined systems, system components, or system services ] at 
[Assignment: organization -defined decision points in the system development life cycle] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Not all system components , functions, or services necessarily require 
significa nt protections. Criticality analysis is a key tenet of, for example, supply chain risk 
management , and informs the prioritization of protection activities. The identification of critical 
system components and functions consider s applicable regulations , directives, policies, standards, 
and guidelines, system functionality requirements, system  and component interfaces, and system  
and component dependencies. System s engineers conduct an end -to-end functional decomposition 
of a system to identify mission -critic al functions and components. The functional decomposition 
includes the identification of core organizational missions supported by the system, decomposition 
into the specific functions to perform those missions, and traceability to the hardware, software, 
and firmware components that implement those functions, including when the functions are shared 
by many components within and beyond the syste m boundary.  
The operational environment of a system or component may impact the criticality including, for 
example , the connections to and dependencies on cyber -physical  systems, devices,  system -of-
systems, and outsourced IT services . System components that allow unmediated access to critical  
system components or functions are considered critical due to the inherent v ulnerabilities such 
components create. Component and function c riticality are assessed in terms of the impact of a  
component or function failure on the organizational missions supported by the system  containing 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 195 those components and functions . A criticality  analysis is performed when an architecture or design 
is being developed, modified, or upgraded. If done early in the system life cycle, organization s 
may consider modifying the system design to  reduce the critical nature of these components  and 
functions  by, for example, adding redundancy or alternate paths into the system design.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, PL -2, PL -8, PL -11, PM -1, SA -8, SA -12, SA -15, SA -20. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 196 3.18   SYSTEM AND SERVIC ES ACQUISITION  
Quick link to System and Services Acquisition summary table  
SA-1 SYSTEM AND SERVICES ACQUISITION POLICY AND PROCEDURES   
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A system and ser vices acquisition policy that : 
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the system and services acquisition po licy 
and the associated system and services acquisition controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
system and services acquisition policy and procedures;  
c. Review and update the current  system and servi ces acquisition: 
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the system and services acquisition  procedures implement the system and services 
acquisition policy and controls; and 
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the system and 
services acquisition policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the SA 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect appli cable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comp rehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can b e included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organizat ions or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflecting the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be docu mented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy  and procedures . policy or 
procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS -8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-30, 800-39, 800-100. 
SA-2 ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 197 a. Determine information security and privacy requirements for the system or system service in 
mission  and business process planning;  
b. Determine, document, and allocate the resources required to protect th e system or system 
service as part of the organizational  capital planning and investment control process; and 
c. Establish a discrete line item for information security  and privacy  in organizational 
programming and budgeting documentation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Resource allocation for information security and privacy includes funding 
for the initial  system or system service acquisition  and funding for the , sustainment  of, and supply 
chain concerns throughout  the system /service.   development life cycle . 
Related Controls :  PL-7, PM-3, PM- 11, SA -9. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 65. 
SA-3 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE  
 Control : 
a. Mana ge the  system using [Assignment: organization- defined system development life cycle]  
that incorporates  information security and privacy considerations;  
b. Define and document information security and privacy roles and responsibilities throughout 
the system de velopment life cycle;  
c. Identif y individuals having information security and privacy roles and responsibilities ; and  
d. Integrate the organizational information security and privacy risk management process into 
system development life cycle activities . 
Supplemental Guidance :  A well-defined system development life cycle process provides the 
foundation for the successful development, implementation, and operation of organizational 
information systems. To apply the required security and privacy controls within the  system 
development life cycle requires a basic understanding of information security  and privacy, threats, 
vulnerabilities, adverse impacts, and risk to critical missions and business functions. The security 
engineering principles in SA -8 cannot be proper ly applied if help individuals thatproperly  design, 
code, and test systems and system components  (including information technology products) do not 
understand security . Organizations include qualified personnel including, for example, chief 
information sec urity officers, security architects, security engineers, system security officers, and 
chief privacy officers in system development life cycle processes to ensure that established 
security  and privacy requirements are incorporated into organizational syste ms. It is also important 
that developers include individuals on the development team that possess the requisite security and 
privacy expertise and skills to ensure that the needed security and privacy capabilities are 
effectively integrated into the system . Security awareness Role -based security  and privacy training 
programs can ensure that individuals having key security and privacy roles and responsibilities 
have the experience, skills, and expertise to conduct assigned system development life cycle activities. The effective integration of security and privacy requirements into enterprise 
architecture also ensure s that important security and privacy considerations are addressed  early in 
the system development life cycle  and that those considerations are dir ectly related to 
organizational mission  and business processes. This process also facilitates the integration of the 
information security and privacy architectures  into the enterprise architecture, consistent with risk 
management strategy of the organization.  Because the development life cycle of  a system involves 
multiple organizations, including, for example, external suppliers, developers, integrators, and 
service providers, it is important to recognize that acquisition and supply chain risk management 
functions and controls play a significant role in the overall effective manag ement of the system 
during that life cycle.  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 198 Related Controls :  AT-3, PL -8, PM-7, SA-4, SA -5, SA -8, SA -11, SA -12, SA -15, SA -17, SA -18, SA -
22. 
Control Enhancements :   
(1) SYSTEM DEVELOPM ENT LIFE CYCLE | MANAGE DEVELOPMENT ENVIRONMENT  
Protect system development, test, and integration environments commensurate with risk 
throughout the system development life cycle  for the system, system component, or system 
service.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CM -2, CM -4, RA -3, SA -4. 
(2) SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT L IFE CYCLE | USE OF LIVE DATA  
(a) Approve, document, and control the use of live data in development, test, and integration 
environments for the system, system component, or system service; and  
(b) Ensure development, test, and integration environments for the system, system component, 
or system service are protected at the same impact or classification level as any live data 
used.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Live data is also referred to as operatio nal data.  The use of live data in 
preproduction environments can result in significant risk to organizations. organizational risk 
management and information Organizations can minimize such risk by using test or dummy 
data during the design, development, and  testing of systems, system components, and system 
services.  
Related Controls :  RA -3. 
(3) SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT L IFE CYCLE | TECHNOLOGY REFRESH  
Plan for and implement a technology refresh schedule to support the system throughout the 
system development life cycl e. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Technology refresh planning may encompass hardware, software, 
firmware, processes, personnel skill sets, suppliers, service providers, and facilities. The use  
of obsolete or nearing obsolete technology may increase security strategies . Related controls : 
AT-3, PM-7, SA-8and privacy risk s associated with, for example, unsupported components, 
components unable to implement security or privacy requirements, counterfeit or re -purposed 
components, slow or inoperable components,  componen ts from untrusted sources, inadvertent 
personnel error, or increased complexity . 
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-30, 800-37, 800-64. 
SA-4 ACQUISITION PROCESS  
 Control :  Include the following require ments , descriptions, and criteria , explicitly or by reference, in 
the acquisition contract for the system , system component , or system service  in accordance with  
applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards , guide lines, 
and organizational mission /business needs : 
a. Security and privacy functional requirements ; 
b. Security strengthStrength of mechanism  requirements;  
c. Security and privacy a ssurance requirements;  
d. Security -related  and privacy  documentation requirements;  
e. Requi rements for protecting security -related  and privacy documentation;  
f. Description of the system development environment and environment in which the system is 
intended to operate;  
g. Allocation of responsibility or identification of parties responsible for infor mation security , 
privacy, and supply chain risk  management ; and 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 199 g.h. Acceptance criteria.  
Supplemental Guidance :  System components are discrete, identifiable information technology assets  
(e.g.,including, for example,  hardware, software, or firmware. These com ponents represent the 
building block s of a system. System components typically consist of commercial information 
technology products.  Security  and privacy  functional requirements include security and privacy 
capabilities, security  functions, and  security  mechanisms.  Security  Strength requirements 
associated with such capabilities, functions, and mechanisms include degree of correctness, 
completeness, resistance to direct attack tampering or bypass , and resistance to tam pering or 
bypass. direct attack.  Securit y and privacy assurance requirements include development processes, 
procedures, practices, and methodologies; and the evidence from development and assessment activities providing grounds for confidence that the required security and privacy functionality is 
implemented and possesses the required security strength has been achieved. of mechanism.  
Security  and privacy  documentation requirements address all phases of the system development 
life cycle.  
Security functionality, assurance, and documentation privacy requirements are expressed in terms 
of security and privacy controls and control enhancements that have been selected through the 
tailoring process. The tailoring process includes, for example, the specification of parameter 
values using assignment and se lection statements and the specification of platform dependencies 
and implementation information. Security  and privacy  documentation provides user and 
administrator guidance regarding the implementation  and operation  of security and privacy 
contr ols. The l evel of detail required in security such documentation is based on the security 
categorization or classification level of the system  and the degree to which organizations depend 
on the stated security or privacy capabilities , functions, or mechanisms to mee t overall risk 
response expectations  (as defined in the organizational risk management strategy) .. Security and 
privacy requirements can include  organizationally  mandated configuration settings specifying  
allowed functions, ports, protocols, and services.  Acceptance criteria for systems, system 
components, and system services are defined in the same manner as such criteria for any 
organizational acquisition or procurement.  The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR)  Section 
7.103 contains information security requirements from FISMA.  
Related Controls :  CM-6, CM-8, PS-7, SA-3, SA -5, SA -8, SA -11, SA -12, SA -15, SA -16, SA -17, 
SA-21. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) ACQUISITION PROCESS | FUNCTIONAL PROPERTI ES OF SECURITY CONTROLS  
Require the developer  of the system , system component , or system service to provide  a 
description of  the functional properties of the controls to be implemented . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Functional properties  of security and privacy controls describe  the 
functionality (i.e., security  or privacy  capabi lity, functions, or mechanisms) visible at the 
interfaces of the control s and specifically exclude  functionality and data structures internal to 
the operation of the control s. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) ACQUISITION PROCESS | DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION INFORMA TION FOR SECURITY CONTROLS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to provide design  and 
implementation  information  for the selected controls that includes: [ Selection (one or more): 
security- relevant external system inter faces; high -level design ; low-level design ; source code  or 
hardware schematics; [Assignment: organization -defined design and implementation information] ] 
at [Assignment: organization- defined level of detail ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may requi re different levels of detail in design and 
implementation documentation for controls implemented in organizational systems, system components, or system services based on mission and business requirements; requirements for 
trustworthiness and resiliency; and requirements for analysis and testing.  Systems can be 
partitioned into multiple subsystems.  Each subsystem within the system can contain one or 
more modules.  The high- level design for the system is expressed in terms of subsystems and 
the interfaces between subsystems providing security- relevant functionality. The low -level 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 200 design for the system is expressed in terms of modules with particular emphasis on software 
and firmware (but not excluding hardware) and the interfaces between modules providing 
security- relevant functionality. Design and implementation documentation may include  
information such as manufacturer, version, serial number, verification hash signature, 
software libraries used, date of purchase or download, and the vendor or download sourc e. 
Source code and hardware schematics are referred to as the implementation representation of 
the system.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) ACQUISITION PROCESS | DEVELOPMENT METHODS , TECHNIQUES , AND PRACTICES  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to demonstrate the use 
of a system development life cycle process that includes [ Assignment: organization -defined state -
of-the-practice system /securitysystem s engineering methods ; [Selection (one or more): systems 
security engineering methods; privacy engineering methods] ; software development methods;  
testing , evaluation , assessment, verification, and validation techniques, methods;  and quality 
control processes] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Following a well-defined system development life cy cle that includes 
state-of-the-practice software development methods, systems /security  engineering methods, 
systems security and privacy engineering methods, and quality control processes , and testing, 
evaluation, and validation techniques  helps to reduce the number and severity of latent errors 
within systems, system components, and system services. Reducing the number and severity of such errors reduces the number of vulnerabilities in those systems, components, and 
services.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) ACQU ISITION PROCESS | ASSIGNMENT OF COMPO NENTS TO SYSTEMS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM -8(9)]. 
(5) ACQUISITION PROCESS | SYSTEM , COMPONENT , AND SERVICE CONFIGURATIO NS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to:  
(a) Deliver the system , component , or service with [ Assignment:  organization- defined security 
configurations ] implemented; and  
(b) Use the configurations as the default for any subsequent system , component , or service 
reinstallation or upgrade . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security c onfigurations include, for example, the U.S. Government 
Configuration Baseline (USGCB) and any limitations on functions, ports, protocols, and 
services. Security characteristics include, for example, requiring that default passwords have 
been changed.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) ACQUISITION PROCESS | USE OF INFORMATION ASSURANCE PRODUCTS  
(a) Employ  only government off -the-shelf or commercial off -the-shelf information assurance and 
information assurance- enabled information technology products that compose an NSA -
approved solution to protect classified information when the networks used to transmit the 
information are at a lower classification level than the information being transmitted; and  
(b) Ensure  that these products have been evaluated and/or validated b y NSA  or in accordance 
with NSA -approved procedures.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Commercial off -the-shelf  IA or IA -enabled information technology 
products used to protect classified  information by cryptographic means may be required to use 
NSA -approved key management.  
Related Controls :  SC-8, SC -12, SC -13. 
(7) ACQUISITION PROCESS | NIAP-APPROVED PROTECTION PROFILES  
(a) Limit the use of commercially provided information assurance and information assurance-
enabled information technology  products  to those products that have been su ccessfully 
evaluated against a National Information Assurance partnership (NIAP) -approved  Protection 
Profile for a specific technology type, if such a profile exists; and  
(b) Require, if no NIAP -approved Protection Profile exists for a specific technology type but a  
commercially provided information technology product relies on cryptographic functionality 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 201 to enforc e its security policy, that the cryptographic module is  FIPS -validated  or NSA -
approved . 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  IA-7, SC-12, SC-13. 
(8) ACQUISITION PROCESS | CONTINUOUS MONITORI NG PLAN  FOR CONTROLS   
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to produce  a plan for 
continuous monitoring of security and privacy control effectiveness that contains the foll owing: 
[Assignment: organization- defined level of detail ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The objective of continuous  monitoring plans  is to determine if the 
complete set of planned, required, and deployed security and privacy controls within the 
system , system c omponent, or system service  continue to be effective over time based on  the 
inevitable changes that occur.  Developer continuous monitoring plans include a sufficient 
level of detail such that the information can be incorporated into the continuous monitori ng 
strategies and programs implemented by organizations.  
Related Controls :  CA-7. 
(9) ACQUISITION PROCESS | FUNCTIONS , PORTS , PROTOCOLS , AND SERVICES IN USE  
Require the developer  of the system , system component , or system service to identify early in  the 
system development life cycle, the functions, ports, protocols, and services intended for  
organizational use . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The identification of functions, ports, protocols, and services early in 
the system development life cycle, for example, durin g the initial requirements definition and 
design phases, allows organizations to influence the design of the system, system component, 
or system service. This early involvement in the system life cycle helps organizations to avoid 
or minimize the use of fu nctions, ports, protocols , or services that pose u nnecessarily high 
risks and understand the t rade- offs involved in blocking specific port s, protocol s, or service s 
or when requiring system service providers to do so. Early identification of functions, port s, 
protocols, and services avoids costly retrofitting of controls after the system, system 
component, or system service has been implemented. SA -9 describes the requirements for 
external system services with organizations identifying which functions, ports , protocols, and 
services are provided from external sources.  
Related Controls :  CM-7, SA -9. 
(10) ACQUISITION PROCESS | USE OF APPROVED PIV PRODUCTS  
Employ only information technology products on the FIPS 201 -approved products list  for Personal 
Identity Verification (PIV) capability implemented within organizational systems. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  IA-2, IA -8, PM -9. 
References :  ISO/IEC 15408; FIPS Publications 140-2, 201; NIST Special Publications 8 00-23, 
800-35, 800-36, 800-37, 800-64, 800-70, 800-73, 800-137, 800-161; NIST Interagency Reports 
7539,  7622,  7676, 7870, 8062 . 
SA-5 SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  
 Control : 
a. Obtain  administ rator  documentation for the system , system component , or system service that  
describes : 
1. Secure configuration, installation, and operation of the system , component , or service;  
2. Effective use and maintenance of security and privacy functions  and mechanisms ; and 
3. Known vulnerabilities regarding configuration and use of administrative or privileged 
functions;  
b. Obtain  user documentation for the system , system component , or system service that  
describes:  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 202 1. User -accessible security and privacy functions  and mechanism s and how to effectively 
use those functions  and mechanisms ; 
2. Methods for user interaction, which enables individuals to use the system , component , or 
service in a more secu re manner  and protect individual privacy ; and  
3. User responsibilities in maintaining t he security of the system , component , or service and 
privacy of individuals ; 
c. Document attempts to obtain  system , system component , or system service documentation  
when such documentation is either unavailable or nonexistent  and takes [ Assignment: 
organizat ion-defined actions ] in response;  
d. Protect documentation as required, in accordance with the organizational risk management 
strategy; and  
e. Distribute documentation to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control  helps organizational personnel understand the implementation 
and operation of security and privacy controls associated with systems, system components, and 
system services. Organizations consider establishing specific measures to determine the quality 
and completeness of the content provided. System documentation may be used, for example, to 
support the management of supply chain risk, incident response, and other functions. Personnel or 
roles requiring documentation may include, for example, system owners , system security offic ers, 
and system administrators. Attempts to obtain documentation may include, for example, directly 
contacting manufacturers or suppliers and conducting web -based searches. The inability  to obtain 
needed documentation may occur, for example, due to the age of the system  or component  or lack 
of support from developers and contractor s. In those situations, organizations may need to recreate 
selected documentation if such documentation is essential to the implementation or operation of 
the security and privacy controls. The level of protection provided for selected information the 
system, component, or service documentation is commensurate with the security category or 
classification of the system. For example, documen tation associated w ith a key DoD weapons 
system or command and control system would typically require a higher level of protection  than a 
routine  administrative system. Documentation that addresses system vulnerabilities may require an 
increased level of protection. Secure operation of the system, includes, for example, initially starting the system and resuming secure system operation after any lapse in system operation . 
Related Controls :  CM-4, CM-6, CM-7, CM-8, PL -2, PL- 4, PL-8, PS-2, SA -3, SA -4, SA-9, SA -10, 
SA-11, SA -15, S A-16, SA -17, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  | FUNCTIONAL PROPERTI ES OF SECURITY CONTROLS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -4(1)]. 
(2) SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  | SECURITY -RELEVANT EXTERNAL SY STEM INTERFACES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -4(2)]. 
(3) SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  | HIGH-LEVEL DESIGN  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -4(2)]. 
(4) SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  | LOW-LEVEL DESIGN  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -4(2)]. 
(5) SYSTEM DOCUMENTATION  | SOURCE CODE  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -4(2)]. 
References :  Non e. 
SA-6 SOFTWARE USAGE RESTRICTIONS  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM -10 and SI -7]. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 203 SA-7 USER -INSTALLED SOFTWARE  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into CM -11 and SI -7]. 
SA-8 SECURITY AND PRIVACY ENGINEERING PRINCIPLES  
 Control :  Apply [Assignment: organization- defined systems security engineering principles ] in the 
specification, design, development, implementation, and modification of the system  and system  
components . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can apply systems security and privacy engineering 
principles primarily to new systems under development or to systems undergoing upgrades . For 
legacy systems, organization s apply systems security  and privacy  engineering principles to system 
upgrades and modifications to the extent feasible, given the current stat e of hardware, software, 
and firmware components within those  system s. Security engineering principles include , for 
example : (i) develop ing layered protections; (ii) establish ing sound The application of systems  
security policy , and privacy engineering conc epts and principles  help to develop trustworthy, 
secure systems and system components and reduce the susceptibility of organizations to 
disruptions, hazards, threats,  and creating privacy -related problems for individuals. Examples of 
these concepts and pri nciples include , develop ing layered protections; establish ing security and 
privacy polic ies, architecture,  and controls as the foundation for design  and development ; 
incorporat ing security  and privacy requirements into the system development life  cycle; 
delineating physical and logical security boundaries; ensur ing that system developers  are trained 
on how to build  secure software; tailor ing security and privacy controls to meet organizational and 
operational needs;  performing threat modeling to identify us e cases , threat agents , attack vectors  
and attack  patterns  as well as , design patterns, and  compensating controls  and design patterns 
needed to mitigate  risk. Organizations that apply security and privacy engineering concepts and 
principles  can facilitate the development of trustworthy, secure systems, system components, and 
system services; reduc e risk to a cceptable levels;  and make  informed risk management decisions.  
Security engineering principles can also be used to protect against certain supply chain risks  
including, for example, incorporating tamper -resistant hardware into a design.  
Related Controls :  PL-8, PM-7, RA -2, RA -3, RA -9, SA -3, SA -4, SA -12, SA -15, SA -17, SA -20, SC -
2, SC -3, SC -32, SC -39. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publications 199, 200; NIST Special Publications 800- 53A, 800-60-1, 800-60-2, 
800-64, 800-160; NIST Interagency Report 8062 . 
SA-9 EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES  
 Control : 
a. Require that providers of external system services comply with organizational security and 
privacy  requirements and employ [ Assignment: organization -defined security controls ] in 
accor dance with applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, 
standards, and guidance ;and privacy controls ]; 
b. Define and document organizational oversight and user roles and responsibilities with regard 
to external system services ; and 
c. Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined processes, methods, and techniques ] to m onitor 
security  and privacy control compliance by external service providers  on an ongoing basis.  
Supplemental Guidance :  External system service s are those service s that are implemented external 
to authorization boundar ies of organizational system s. This includes services that are used by, but 
not a part of, organizational systems.  FISMA  and OMB policy require that organizations using 
external service providers that are processing, storing, or transmitting federal information or 
operating information systems on behalf of the federal government ensure that such providers 
meet the same security requirements that federal agencies are required to meet.  Organizations 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 204 establish  relationships with external service providers in a variety of ways including, for example, 
through business partnerships, contracts, interagency agreements, lines of business arrangements, 
licensing agreements, joint ventures, and supply chain exchanges.  The responsibility for managing 
risks from the use of external system services remains with authorizing officials. For services 
external to organization s, a chain of trust requires that organization s establish and retain a level of 
confidence that each par ticipating provider in the  potentially complex  consumer -provider 
relationship provides adequate protection for the services  rendered. The extent and nature of this 
chain of trust varies based on the relationship s between organizat ions and the external prov iders. 
Organizations document the basis for trust relationships so the relationships can be monitored over 
time. External system services documentation includes government, service provider s, end user 
security r oles and responsibilities, and  service -level agreements. Service -level agreements define 
expectations of performance for implemented security and privacy control s; describe measurable 
outcomes, and identify remedies and response requirements for identified instance s of 
noncompliance.  
Related Controls :  CA-3, CP -2, IR -4, IR -7, PL -10, PL -11, PS -7, SA -2, SA -4, SA-12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES  | RISK ASSESSMENTS AND ORGANIZATIONAL APPR OVALS  
(a) Conduct an organizational assessment of risk prior to the acquisition or outsourcing of 
informa tion security services; and  
(b) Verify  that the acquisition or outsourcing of dedicated information security services is 
approved by [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Examples of i nformation security services includ e the operation of 
security  devices such as firewalls, or key management services ; and incident mo nitoring, 
analysis and response.  Risks assessed may include, for example, system -related, mission -
related, privacy -related, or supply chain -related risks.  
Related Controls :  CA -6, RA -3. 
(2) EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES  | IDENTIFICATION OF F UNCTIONS , PORTS , PROTOCOLS , AND SERVICES  
Require providers of [ Assignment: organization- defined external system services]  to identify the 
functions, ports, protocols, and other services required for the use of such services.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Information from external service providers regarding the specific 
functions, ports, protocols, and services used in the provision of such services can be useful 
when the need arises to un derstand the t rade- offs involved in restricting certain  functions and 
services or blocking certain port s and protocol s. 
Related Controls :  CM -6, CM-7. 
(3) EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES  | ESTABLISH AND MAINTAIN TRUST RELAT IONSHIP WITH PROVIDE RS  
Establish , document,  and maintain trust relationships with external service providers based on 
[Assignment: organization- defined security and privacy requirements, properties, factors, or 
conditions defining acceptable trust  relationships ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The degree of confidence that the risk from using external services is 
at an acceptable level depends on the trust that organizations place in the external providers, individually or in combination. Trust relationships can help organization s to gain increased 
levels of confidence that participating service providers are providing adequate protection for 
the services rendered. They can also be useful when conducting incident response or when 
planning for upgrades or obsolescence. Trust  relationships can be complicated due to the 
number of potential entities participating in the consumer -provider interactions , subordinate 
relationships and levels of trust,  and types of interactions between the parties. In some cases, 
the degree of trust is based on the level  of control o rganizations can exert on external service 
providers regarding the controls necessary for the protection of the service, information , or 
individual privacy  and the evidence brought forth as to the effectiveness of the implemented 
controls.  The level of con trol is established by the terms and conditions of the contracts or 
service -level agreements. E xtensive control may include negotiating contracts or agreements 
that specify security and privacy requirements for providers . Limited control may include  
using contracts or service -level agreements to obtain commodity services such as commercial 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 205 telecommunications services . In other cases, levels of trust are based on factors that convince 
organizations that required security controls have been employed and that determinations of 
control effectiveness exist. For example, separately authorized external information system 
services provided to organizations th rough well -established business relationships may 
provide degrees of trust in such services within the tolera ble risk range o f the organizations 
using the services.  External service providers may also outsource selected services to other 
external entities, making the trust relationship more difficult and complicated to manage. 
Depending on the nature of the servi ces, organizations may find it very difficult  to place 
significant trust in external providers. This is not due to any inherent untrustworthiness on the 
part of providers, but to the intrinsic level of risk in the services. . 
Related Controls :  SA-12. 
(4) EXTER NAL SYSTEM SERVICES  | CONSISTENT INTEREST S OF CONSUMERS AND P ROVIDERS  
employs Take [Assignment: organization- defined security safeguardsactions] to ensureverify  that 
the interests of [ Assignment: organization- defined external service provider s] are consist ent with 
and reflect organizational interests.  
Supplemental Guidance :  As organizations increasingly use external service pr oviders, it is 
possible that the interests of the service provider s may diverge from organizational interests. 
In such situations , simply having the correct required  technical, procedural management , or 
operational safeguards controls  in place may not be sufficient if the service provider s that 
implement and c ontrol manage  those safeguards controls  are not operating in a manner 
consi stent w ith the interests of the consuming organizations. The actions that organizations 
might take to address such concerns include, for example, requiring background checks for 
selected service provider personnel ; examining ownership records ; employing only 
trustworthy service providers , including providers with which organizations have had positive 
experiences ),successful trust relationships; and conducting routine periodic , unscheduled 
visits to service provider facilities.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) EXTERNAL SYSTEM SERVICES  | PROCESSING , STORAGE , AND SERVICE LOCATIO N  
Restrict the location of [ Selection (one or more): information processing; information  or data; 
system services] to [Assignment: organization -defined locations] based on [ Assignment: 
organization- defined requirements or conditions ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  The location of information processing, information and data  storage, 
or system services that are critical to organization s can have a direct impact on the ability of 
those organization s to success fully execute their missions and business functions. This occurs 
when  external providers control the  location of processing, storage, or services. The criteria 
that external providers use for the selection of processing, storage, or service locations  may b e 
different from the criteria organizations use. For example, organization s may desire that data 
or information storage locations are restricted to certain locations to  help facilitate incident 
response  activities in case of information security or privacy  incidents. Such incident response 
activities including, for example, forensic analyses and after -the-fact investigations, may be 
adversely affected by the governing laws or protocols in the locations where processing and 
storage occur and/or the locations  from which system services emanate.  
Related Controls :  SA-5, SA -12. 
(6) EXTERNAL SYSTEM  SERVICES  | ORGANIZATION -CONTROLLED CRYPTOGRA PHIC KEYS  
Maintain exclusive control of cryptographic keys.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Maintaining exclusive control of cryptogra phic keys in an external 
system prevents decryption of organizational data by external system staff. This enhancement 
can be implemented, for example, by encrypting and decrypting data inside the organization 
as data is sent to and received from the extern al system or through use of a component that 
permits encryption and decryption functions to be local to the external system, but allows the 
organization exclusive access to encryption keys.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13, SI -4. 
(7) EXTERNAL SYSTEM  SERVICES  | ORGANIZATION -CONTROLLED INTEGRITY  CHECKING  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 206 Provide the capability to check the integrity of organizational information while it resides in the 
external system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Storage of organizational information in an external system could limit 
organizational visibility into the security status of its data. The ability for the organization to 
verify and validate the integrity of its stored data without transferring it out of the external 
system provides such visibility.  
Related Controls :  SI-7. 
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-35, 800-161. 
SA-10 DEVELOPER C ONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT  
 Control :  Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service  to: 
a. Perform configuration management during system , component , or service [Selection (one or 
more): design; development; implementation; operation; disposal ]; 
b. Document, m anage , and control the integrity of changes  to [Assignment: organization- defined 
configuration items under configuration management ]; 
c. Implement only organization -approved changes  to the system, component, or service ; 
d. Document approved changes to the system , component , or service and the potential security  
and privacy  impacts of such changes;  and 
e. Track security flaws and flaw resolution  within the system , component , or service and report 
findings to [ Assignment: organization- defined per sonnel ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control also applies to organizations conducting internal information 
system s development and integration.  Organizations consider the quality and completeness of the 
configuration management activities conducted by dev elopers as direct evidence of applying 
effective security safeguards.  Safeguards controls . Controls  include, for example, protecting from 
unauthorized modification or destruction , the master copies of material used to generate security -
relevant portions of the system hardware, software, and firmware.  Maintaining the integrity of 
changes to the system, system component, or  system service requires strict configuration control 
throughout the system development life cycle to track authorized changes  and to prevent 
unauthorized changes . The configuration items that are placed under configuration management  (if 
existence/use is required by other security controls)  include: the formal model ; the functional, 
high-level, and low -level design specifications; other des ign data; implementation documentation; 
source code and hardware schematics ; the current running version of the object code; tools for 
comparing new  versions of security -relevant hardware descriptions and software/firmware sourc e 
code with previous version s; and test fixtures and documentation . Depending on the mission  and 
business needs of organization s and the nature of the contractual relationship s in place , developers 
may provide  configuration management support during the operations and maintenance pha ses of 
the system life cycle.  
Related Controls :  CM-2, CM-3, CM -4, CM-7, CM-9, SA-4, SA -5, SA -12, SI -2. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DEVELOPER CONFIGURAT ION MANAGEMENT | SOFTWARE AND FIRMWARE INTEGRITY VERIFICATION  
Require the developer of the system , system com ponent , or system service to enable integrity 
verification of software and firmware componen ts. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement allows organizations to detect unauthorized 
changes to software and firmware components through the use of using developer -provided 
tools, techniques, and mechanisms. Integrity checking mechanisms can also address 
counterfeiting of software and firmware components. Organizations verify the integrity of 
software and firmware components, for example, through secure o ne-way hashes provided by 
developers. Delivered software and firmware components also include any updates to such 
components.  
Related Controls :  SI-7. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 207 (2) DEVELOPER CONFIGURAT ION MANAGEMENT | ALTERNATIVE CONFIGU RATION MANAGEMENT PROCESSES  
Provide an alternat e configuration management process using  organizational personnel in the 
absence of a dedicated developer configuration management team.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Alternate configuration management processes may be required, for 
example, when organizations us e commercial off -the-shelf information technology products. 
Alternate c onfiguration management process es include  organizational personnel that: (i) are 
responsible for reviewing /approving  review  and approv e proposed changes to system s, system 
components, a nd system services; and that conduct security and privacy impact analyses prior 
to the implementation of changes to system s, components, or services  (e.g., a configuration 
control board that considers security impacts of changes during development and incl udes 
representatives of both the organization and the developer, when applicable) .. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) DEVELOPER CONFIGURAT ION MANAGEMENT | HARDWARE INTEGRITY VERIFICATION  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to enable integrity 
verification  of hardware components . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement allows organizations to detect unauthorized 
changes to hardware components  using developer -provided tools, techniques, methods, and 
mechanisms. Organizati ons verify the integrity of hardware components, for example, with 
hard-to-copy labels and verifiable serial numbers provided by developers, and by requiring 
the implementation of anti -tamper technologies. Delivered hardware components also include 
updates  to such components.  
Related Controls :  SI-7. 
(4) DEVELOPER CONFIGURAT ION MANAGEMENT | TRUSTED GENERATION  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to  employ tools for 
comparing newly generated version s of security -relevant hardw are description s and 
software/firmware , source  code,  and object code w ith previous versions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses authorized changes to hardware, 
software, and firmware components between versions during development. T he focus is on 
the efficacy of the configuration management process by the developer to ensure that newly 
generated versions of security -relevant hardware descriptions, source code, and object code 
continue to enforce the security policy for the system, sy stem component, or system service. 
In contrast, SA -10(1) and SA -10(3) allow organizations to detect unauthorized changes to 
hardware, software, and firmware components  using tools, techniques, and/or mechanisms 
provided by developers.  
Related Controls :  None. 
(5) DEVELOPER CONFIGURAT ION MANAGEMENT | MAPPING INTEGRITY F OR VERSION CONTROL  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to  maintain the 
integrity of the mapping between the master build data (hardware drawings and software/ firmware 
code) describing the curren t version of security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware and the 
on-site master copy of the data for the current version . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses changes to hardware, software, 
and firmware components during initial development and during system life cycle updates. 
Maintaining the integrity between the master copies of security -relevant hardware, software, 
and firmware (including designs and source code) and the equivalent data in  master copies 
on-site in operational environments is essential to ensure the availability of organizational 
systems supporting critical missions and business functions.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(6) DEVELOPER CONFIGURAT ION MANAGEMENT | TRUSTED DISTRIBUTIO N  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to  execute procedures 
for ensuring that security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware updates distributed to the 
organization are exactly as specified by the master copies.  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 208 Supplem ental Guidance :  The trusted distribution of security -relevant hardware, software, and 
firmware updates ensure that such updates are correct representations of the master copies 
maintained by the developer and have not been tampered with during distributio n. 
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publications 140-2, 180-4, 202; NIST Special Publication 800- 128. 
SA-11 DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATION  
Control :  Require the developer of the sys tem, system component , or system service , at all post-
design phases of the system development life cycle,  to: 
a. Create and implement a security and privacy assessment plan; 
b. Perform  [Selection (one or more): unit; integration; system; regression] testing/evaluation 
[Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] at [Assignment: organization- defined depth and 
coverage];  
c. Produce evidence of the execution of the security assessment plan and the results of the 
security testing and evaluation;  
d. Implement a verifiable f law remediation process ; and  
e. Correct flaws identified during security testing and evaluation . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Developmental security testing /evaluation  occurs  at all post-design phases  
of the system  development life cycle . Such testing/  and evaluat ion confirms that  the required 
security and privacy controls are implemented correctly , operating as intended , enforcing the 
desired security and privacy policies , and meet ing established security and privacy requirements.  
Security properties of  systems  and the privacy of individuals  may be affected by the 
interconnection of system components  or changes to those components . These interconnections or 
changes (e.g.,including, for example,  upgrading or replacing applications, operating systems , and 
firmware,  may adversely affect previously implemented security and privacy controls . This 
control provides additional types of security testing and evaluation that developers can conduct to 
reduce or eliminate potential flaws.  Testing custom software applications may  require approaches 
such as static analysis, dynamic analysis, binary analysis, or a hybrid of the three approaches. 
Developers can use these analysis approaches in a variety of tools (e.g., web -based application 
scanners, static analysis tools, binary ana lyzers) and in source code reviews. Security  and privacy  
assessment plans provide the specific activities that developers plan to carry out including the 
types of analyses, testing, evaluation, and reviews of software and firmware componen ts, the 
degree of  rigor to be applied, and the types of artifacts produced during those processes . The depth  
of security testing and evaluation refers to the rigor and level of detail associated with the 
assessment pr ocess  (e.g., black box, gray box, or white box testing). . The coverage of security 
testing and evaluation refers to the scope (i.e., number and type) of the artifacts included in the 
assessment process. Contracts specify the acceptance criteria for security and privacy assessment  
plans, flaw remediation process es, and the evidence that the plans  and processes have been 
diligently applied.  Methods for reviewing and protecting assessment plans, evidence, and 
documentation are commensurate with the security category or classification level of the system . 
Contracts may specify documentation protection requirements.  
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA-7, CM-4, SA -3, SA -4, SA -5, SA-12, SA -15, SA -17, SI-2. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATI ON | STATIC CODE ANALYSI S 
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to employ static code 
analysis tools to identify common flaws and document the results of the analysis.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Static code analysis provides a technology and methodology for 
security reviews . and may include, for example, checking for weaknesses in the code and 
checking for incorporation of libraries or other included code with known vulnerabilities or 
that are out -of-date and not supported.  Such analysis can be used to identify security 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 209 vulnerabilities and enforce securitysecure coding practices. Static code analysis is most 
effective when used early in the development process, when each code change can be 
automatically scanned for potential wea knesses. Static analysis can provide clear remediation 
guida nce along with defects to enable developers to fix such defects. Evidence of correct 
implement ation of static analysis can include , for example,  aggregate defect density for 
critical defect types ; evidence that defects were inspected by developers or secur ity 
professionals ; and evidence that defects were remediated . An excessively high density of 
ignored findings, commonly referred to as false positives,  indicates a potential problem with 
the analysis proc ess or the analysis tool . In such cases , organizatio ns weigh the val idity of the 
evidence against evidence from other sources.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATI ON | THREAT MODELING AND VULNERABILITY ANALYSES  
Require the developer of the  system , system component , or system ser vice to perform threat 
modeling and vulnerability  analyses at [Assignment: organization- defined breadth  and depth]  
during development and during the subsequent testing and evaluation of the as-built system , 
component , or service that:   
(a) Uses [Assignment: or ganization -defined information concerning impact, environment of 
operations, known or assumed threats, and acceptable risk levels] ; 
(b) Employs [ Assignment: organization- defined tools and methods ]; and  
(c) Produces evidence that meets [ Assignment: organization- defined acceptance criteria].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Application sSystems, system components, and system services  may 
deviate significantly from the functional and design specifications created during the 
requirements and design phases of the system developme nt life cycle . Therefore, threat  
modeling and vulnerability analyses  of those systems, system components, and system 
services prior to delivery  are critical to the effective operation of those systems, components, 
and services . Threat  modeling and vulnerab ility analyses at this phase of the system 
development life cycle help to ensure that design or and implementation changes have been 
accounted for  and that any new vulnerabilities created as a result because of those changes 
have been reviewed and mitigated.   
Related controls : PM -15, RA -3, RA -5. 
(3) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATI ON | INDEPENDENT VERIFICATION OF ASSESSMENT PLANS 
AND EVIDENCE  
(a) Require an independent agent satisfying [ Assignment: organization- defined independence 
criteria] to verify the corr ect implementation of the developer security and privacy assessment 
plans and the evidence produced during security testing  and evaluation ; and  
(b) Verify  that the independent agent is provided with sufficient information to complete the 
verification process o r granted the authority to obtain such information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Independent agents have the necessary qualifications, including the 
expertise, skills, training, certifications, and experience, to verify the correct implementation 
of developer s ecurity and privacy assessment plans.  
Related Controls :  AT-3, RA -5. 
 
(4) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATI ON | MANUAL CODE REVIEWS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to perform a manual  
code review  of [Assignment : organization- defined specific code]  using  [Assignment: organization-
defined processes, procedures, and/or techniques] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Manual  code review s are usually reserved for  the critical software and 
firmware components of systems.  Such code  reviews are uniquely effective atin identifying 
weaknesses that require knowledge of the application’s requirements or context which in most 
cases, are unavailable to  automated  analytic tools and techniques including static and dynamic 
analysis. Component s benefiting from manual review include , for example, verifying access 
control matrices against application controls and reviewing more detailed  aspects of 
cryptographic implementations and controls.  
Related Controls :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 210 (5) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATION | PENETRATION TESTING  / ANALYSIS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to perform  penetration 
testing  at [Assignment: organization- defined breadth  and depth ] and with [ Assignment: 
organization- defined constrain ts]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Penetration testing is an assessment methodology in which assessors, 
using all available information technology product or system documentation (e.g., 
product/ system design  specifications , source code, and administrator/operato r manuals) and 
working under specific constraints, attempt to circumvent implemented  security and privacy 
features of information technology products and system s. Useful information for assessors 
conducting penetration testing can include, for example, pro duct and system design 
specifications , source code, and administrator and operator manuals. Penetration testing can 
include white -box, gray- box, or black box testing with associated analyses performed by 
skilled  security professionals simulating adversary actions. The objective of penetration 
testing  is to uncover the potential vulnerabilities in information technology products  and 
systems , system components and services  resulting from implementation errors, configuration 
faults, or other operational  deploy ment  weaknesses  or deficiencies . Penetration tests can be 
performed in conjunction with automated and manual code reviews to provide greater level s 
of analysis than would ordinarily be possible.  
Related Controls :  CA-8. 
(6) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALU ATION | ATTACK SURFACE REVI EWS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to perform  attack 
surface reviews.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Attack surfaces of syste ms and system components are exposed areas 
that make those systems more vulnerable to c yber attacks. This includes any accessible areas 
where weaknesses or deficiencies in information  system s (including the hardware, software, 
and firmware components pro vide opportunities for adversaries to exploit vulnerabilities.  
Attack  surface reviews ensure that  developers analyze the design and implementation changes 
to systems  and mitigate  attack vectors generated as a result of the changes.  Correction of 
identified flaws includes, for example, deprecation of unsafe functions.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(7) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUATI ON | VERIFY SCOPE OF TESTING AND  EVALUATION  
Require the developer of the  system , system component , or system service to verify  that the scope 
of security testing and evaluation provides  complete  coverage of required security and privacy 
controls  at [Assignment: organization- defined depth of testing  and evaluation ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Verifying that security testing and evaluation provides complete 
coverage of required security  and privacy  contro ls can be accomplished by a variety of 
analytic techniques ranging from informal to formal. Each of these techniques provides an 
increasing level of assurance corresponding to the degree of formality of the analysis. 
Rigorously demonstrating security contr ol coverage at the highest level s of assurance can be 
provided using formal modeling and analysis techniques including correlation between 
control implementation and corresponding test cases.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(8) DEVELOPER SECURITY TESTING AND EVALUAT ION | DYNAMIC CODE ANALYS IS  
Require the developer of the system, system component, or system service to employ dynamic 
code analysis tools to identify common flaws and document the results of the analysis.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Dynamic code  analysis pro vides run -time verification of software 
programs, using tools capable of monitoring programs for memory corruption, user privilege 
issues, and other potential security problems. Dynamic code analysis em ploys run -time tools 
to ensure that security functiona lity performs in the way it was designed. A specialized type 
of dynamic analysis, known as fuzz testing, induces program failures by deliberately introducing malformed or random data into software programs. Fuzz testing strategies derive 
from the intended use of applications and the associated functional and design specifications 
for the applications.  To understand  the scope of dynamic code analysis and hence the 
assurance provided, organizations may also consider conducting code coverage analysis 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 211 (checking  the degree to which the code has been tested using metrics such as percent of 
subroutines tested or percent of program statements called during execution of the test suite) 
and/or concordance analysis (checking for words that are out of place in software code such 
as non -English language words or derogatory terms).  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  ISO/IEC 15408; NIST Special Publications 800 -30, 800-53A, 800-154.  
SA-12 SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  
 Control :  The organization protects against supply chain threats t o the information system, system 
component,  or information system service by  employing  
a. Employ  [Assignment: organization- defined security supply chain safeguards ] as part of a 
comprehensive, defense -in-breadth information security strategy. to protect against supply 
chain risks to the system, system component,  or system service  and to limit the harm or 
consequences from supply chain -related events ; and  
b. Document the selected and implemented supply chain safeguards in [Selection: security and 
privacy plans ; supply chain risk management plan; [Assignment: organization -defined 
document ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information systems ( Supply chain- related events including system 
components that compose those systems) need to be protected throughout the system , for 
example, disruption, theft, inser tion of counterfeits, insertion of malicious code, malicious 
development life cycle  (i.e., during design, development, manufacturing , packaging, assembly, 
distribution, system integration, operations, maintenance, and retirement). Protection of 
organizational information systems  is accomplished through threat awareness, by the  
identification, management, and reduction  of vulnerabilitie s at each phase of the life cycle and the 
use of complementary, mutually reinforcing strategies to  respond to risk. Organizations consider 
implementing a standardized process to address supply chain risk with respect to information 
systems  and system compo nents , and to educate the acquisition workforce on threats, risk, and 
required security controls. Organizations use the acquisition /procurement process es to require 
supply chain entities  to implement necessary security safeguards to : (i) reduce the likelih ood of 
unauthorized modifications at each stage in the supply chain ; and (ii) protect information system s 
and information system components , prior to taking practices, improper  delivery of such 
systems /components . This control enhancement also applies t o information system services. 
Security safeguards include, for example: (i) security controls for development systems , 
development facilities,  and external connections to development systems; (ii) vetting development 
personnel; and (iii) use of tamper -evident  packaging during shipping/ warehousing. practices, and 
use of defective components,  can adversely impact the confidentiality, integrity, or av ailability of 
information processed, stored, or transmitted by a system. Such events can also  adversely impact 
organizational operations (including mission, functions, image, or reputation), organizational 
assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. Supply chain -related events may be 
unintentional or malicious and occur at any point during the system life  cycle. Managing supply 
chain risks involves gaining visibility and understanding of the processes and procedures used to 
protect the system , system component , or system service  throughout the system  life cycle. This 
allows organizations to make appropriat e acquisition decisions and to identify appropriate 
mitigation strategies. A supply chain risk management plan includes, for example, an 
unambiguous expression of the supply chain risk tolerance for the system, acceptable supply chain 
risk mitigation strategies or controls, a description of and justification for supply chain protection 
measures taken, a process for consistently evaluating and monitoring supply chain risk, 
approaches for implementing and communicating the supply chain risk management plan, a nd 
associated roles and responsibilities . 
Related Controls :  AT-3, CM -8, IR -4, IR-6, MA -2, MA-6, PE-3, PE-16, PL -8, PM-31, RA-3, RA -7, 
RA-9, SA-2, SA -3, SA -4, SA -5, SA -8, SA -9, SA -10, SA -15, SA -18, SA -19, SC -7, SC -29, SC -30, 
SC-38, SI -7. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 212 Control Enhancements : 
(1) SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT PROTECTION  | ACQUISITION STRATEG IES, TOOLS , AND METHODS  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined acquisition strategies, contract tools, and procurement 
methods ] to protect against, identify, and mitigate supply chain risks .z For the purchase of the 
information system, system component, or information system sercice from supliers.   
Supplemental Guidance :  The use of the acquisition process early in the system development life 
cycle provides an important vehicle  to protect th e supply chain.   Organizations use available 
all-source intelligence analysis to inform the tailoring of acquisition strategies, tools, and 
methods.   There are many  useful tools and techniques available including, for example, 
obscuring the end use of a system or system component , using blind or filtered buys, requiring 
tamper -evident packaging, or using trusted or controlled distribution. The results from a 
supply  chain risk assessment  can inform which strategies, tools, and methods are most 
appli cable to the situation. Tools and techniques may provide protections against the insertion 
of counterfeits, tampering, theft, unauthorize d production, insertion of malicious software, as 
well as poor manufacturing and development practices throughout the system dev elopment 
life cycle . Organizations also consider creati ng incentives for suppliers  who implement 
security and privacy controls; promote transparency into their organizational processes and 
security  and privacy practices ; provide  additional vetting of the p rocesses and practices of 
subordinate suppliers, critical system components, and services; restrict purchases from 
specific suppliers; and provide contract language that addresses the prohibition of tainted or 
counterfeit components . Finally, organizations  consider providing training, education, and 
awareness programs for organizational personnel regarding  supply chain risk, available 
mitigation strategies, and when they should be used . Methods for reviewing and protecting 
development plans, evidence, and d ocumentation are commensurate with the security 
category or classification level of the information system. Contracts may specify 
documentation protection requirements.  
(2) SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT PROTECTION  | SUPPLIER REVIEWS  
The organization conducts a supplier  review prior to entering into a contractual agreement to 
acquire the information  
Review the supply chain -related risks associated with suppliers or contractors and the system, 
system component, or information system service they provide [ Assignmen t: organization- defined 
frequency].  
Supplemental Guidance :  A review of supplier risk may incl ude, for example : (i) analysis of 
supplier , the ability of the supplier to effectively assess or vet any subordinate second -tier 
and third -tier suppliers and con tractors. These reviews may be conducted by the organization 
or by an independent third party. The reviews consider documented processes  used to design, 
develop, test, implement, verify, deliver, and support , documented controls, publicly  available  
informa tion system s, system components , and related to the supplier or contractor, and all -
source intelligence where possible. The organization  can use open -source information system 
services ; and (ii) assessment of supplier training to monitor for indications of  stolen CUI, poor 
development and experience in developing systems, components, or services quality control 
practices, information spillage, or counterfeits. In some cases, it may be appropriate to share 
review results  with the required security capability . These reviews provide other  organizations 
in accordance with increased  level s of visibility into supplier  activities  during the system 
development life cycle to promote more effective any applicable inter -organizational 
agreements or contracts . Supplier re views can also help to determine whether primary 
suppliers have security safeguards in place and a practice for vetting subordinate suppliers, for 
example, second - and third -tier suppliers, and any subcontractors.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) SUPPLY CHAIN RISK  MANAGEMENT  SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION  | TRUSTED SHIPPING AN D WAREHOUSING  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -12(1)].  
(4) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | DIVERSITY OF SUPPLI ERS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -12(13)].   
(5) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEM ENT | LIMITATION OF HARM  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 213 Employ [Assignment: organization- defined  security  safeguards] to limit harm from potential 
adversaries identifying and targeting the organizational supply chain.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Supply chain risk is part of the advanced pe rsistent threat (APT) . 
Security safeguards  and countermeasures Safeguards that can be implemented  to reduce the 
probability of adversaries successfully identifying and targeting the supply chain include, for 
example, avoiding the purchase of custom or non- standardized configurations  to reduce the 
risk of acquiring information systems, components, or products that have been corrupted via 
supply chain actions targeted at specific organizations ; employing a diverse set of suppliers  to 
limit the potential harm f rom any given supplier in the supply chain;  ; employing approved 
vendor lists with standing reputations in industry; using procurement carve outs that provide 
exclusions to commitments or obligations; and designing the system to include diversity of 
materi als, components, and paths. In addition, organizations consider minimizing the time 
between purchase decisions and required delivery to limit the opportunities for adversaries to 
corrupt system components . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(6) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | MINIMIZING PROCUREM ENT TIME  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -12(1)].  
(7) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | ASSESSMENTS PRIOR T O SELECTION , ACCEPTANCE , AND 
UPDATE  
Assess the system, system component, or system service prior  to selection, acceptance, 
modification, or update . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Assessments include , for example, testing, evaluation s, reviews, and 
analyses. Independent, third- party entities or Organizational personnel or independent, 
external  entities conduct assessments of systems, components, products, tools, and services . 
Organizations conduct assessments  to uncover unintentional vulnerabilities  and intentional 
vulnerabilities  including, for example,  , evidence of tampering, or evidence of non -
compliance with supply cha in controls . These include, for example, malicious code, malicious 
processes, defective software, and counterfeits. Assessments can include, for example, visual 
or physical inspection ; evaluations ; design proposal reviews ; static analys es,and dynamic 
analy ses; visual, x- ray, or magnetic particle inspections; simu lations ; white, gray, and black 
box testing ; fuzz testing ; stress testing ; and penetration testing , and ensuring. Organizations 
can also ensure that the components  or services are genuine by using, for example, tags, 
cryptographic hash verif ications, or digital signatures . Evidence generated during security 
assessments is documented for follow -on actions carried out by organizations.  
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA -8, RA -5, SA -11, SI -7. 
(8) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | USE OF ALL -SOURCE INTELLIGENCE  
Use all -source intelligence to assist  in the analysis of suppliers and  potential suppliers of  the 
information system, system component, or  information system servicesupply chain risk.  
Supplemental Gui dance :  Organizations employ all -source  intelligence to inform engineering, 
acquisition, and supply chain risk management decisions. All -source intelligence consists of 
intelligence products and/or organizations and activities that incorporate information d erived 
from  all available sources  of information, most frequently , including, for example, publicly  
available  or open -source information;  human intelligence ; signals intelligence ; imagery 
intelligence ; and measurement and signature intellige nce and open source data in the 
production of finished intelligence.  . This information  is used to analyze the risk of intentional 
and unintentional vulnerabilities from development, manufacturing, and delivery processes, 
people, and the environment. This review may be p erformed on suppliers at multiple tiers in 
the supply chain sufficient to manage risks. Organizations may develop agreements to share 
all-source intelligence information or resulting decisions with other organizations , as 
appropriate . 
Related Controls :  None. 
(9) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | OPERATIONS SECURITY   
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 214 Employ  [Assignment: organization- defined Operations Security (OPSEC) safeguards]  in 
accordance with  classification guides to protect supply chain- related information for the system, 
system component, or system service.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Supply chain information includes, for example , user identities ; uses 
for systems, system components, and system services; supplier  identities; supplier processes ; 
security requirements ; design specifications ; testing and evaluation results ; and system and 
component configurations. This control enhancement expands the scope of OPSEC to include 
suppliers and potential suppliers. OPSEC is a process of identifying critical information and 
subsequently analyz ing friendly actions attendant to operations and other activities to  identify 
those actions that can be observed by potential adversaries; determine indicators that potential adversaries might obtain that could be interpreted or pieced together to derive i nformation in 
sufficient time to cause harm to organizations; implement safeguards  or countermeasures to 
eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level, exploitable vulnerabilities; and finally, consider 
how aggregated information may compromise the confidenti ality of users or the specific uses 
of the supply chain.  OPSEC may require organization s to withhold specific mission /business 
information from suppliers and may include the use of intermediaries to hide the end use, or 
users of systems, system components,  or system services.  
Related Controls :  SC-38. 
(10) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | VALIDATE AS GENUINE AND NOT ALTERED  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] to validate that the system or 
system component received is  genuine  and has not been altered.  
Supplemental Guidance :  For some many systems and system components, especially hardware, 
there are technical means to determine if the components items  are genuine or have been 
altered . Security safeguards  used to validate the auth enticity of information system s and 
information system components  include , including, for example, optical and nanotechnology 
tagging;  physically unclonable functions; side -channel analysis . For hardware, detailed bill of 
material information can highlight  the elements with embedded logic complete with 
component  ; and production location.  
visible anti -tamper stickers  and labels. Safeguards can also include monitoring for  out of 
specification performance, which can be an  indicator of tampering or counterfeits. Suppliers 
and contractors may have processes for validating that a system or component is genuine and 
has not been altered, and for replacing a suspect system or component, which the organization 
may leverage. Some indications of tampering may be visibl e and addressable before accepting 
delivery including, for example, broken seals, inconsistent packaging,  and incorrect  labels . 
The organization may consider providing training to appropriate personnel on how to identify 
suspicious syst em or component deli veries. When a system or component is suspected of 
being altered or counterfeit, the organization considers notifying the supplier, contractor, or 
original equipment manufacturer who may be able to replace the item or provide a forensic 
capability to deter mine the origin of the counterfeit or altered item . 
Related Controls :  SA-19. 
(11) SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT  | PENETRATION TESTING  AND ANALYSIS  
Employ  [Selection (one or more): organizational analysis, independent third- party analysis, 
organizational penetra tion testing, independent third- party penetration testing ] of [ Assignment: 
organization- defined supply chain elements , processes, and actors]  associated with the system, 
system component , or system service.  
Supplemental Guidance:   This control enhancement addresses analysis or testing of the supply 
chain , not just delivered items. Supply chain elements are  information technology product s or 
product . It also considers the relationships or linkages between entities and procedures within 
the supply chain inclu ding, for example, development and delivery . Supply chain elements 
include system  component s that contain programmable logic and that are critically important 
to information system  functions . Supply chain processes  include, for example , hardware, 
software,  and firmware development processes ; shipping  and handling procedures ; personnel 
and physical security programs ; configuration management tools , techniques, and measures to 
maintain provenance ; and programs, processes, or procedures  associated with the pro duction  
and distribution of supply chain elements . Supply chain actors are individuals with specific 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 215 roles and responsibilities in the supply chain. The evidence generated and collected during 
analyses and testing of supply chain elements, processes, and actors is documented and used 
to inform organizational risk management  activities and decisions.  
Related Controls :  RA-5. 
(11)(12) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION | INTER -ORGANIZATIONAL RISK MANAGEMENT  | NOTIFICATION  AGREEMENTS  
Establish agreements and procedures with  entit ies involved in the supply chain for the system, 
system component, or system service  for the [ Selection (one or more): notification of supply chain 
compromises; results of assessments or audits; [ Assignment: organization- defined information] ]. 
Supplemental  Guidance :  The establishment of agreements and procedures provides for  formal 
communications among supply chain entities.  Early notification of compromises in the supply 
chain that can potentially adversely affect or have adversely affected organizational  systems, 
including critical system components, is essential for organizations to effectively respond to 
such incidents.  The results  of assessments or audits may include open -source information that 
contributed to a decision or result and could be used to help the supply chain entity resolve a 
concern or improve its processes . 
Related Controls :  IR-8. 
(13) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | CRITICAL SYSTEM COM PONENTS  
SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION | CRITICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM COMPONENTS  
The organization employ s [Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] to ensure an 
adequate supply of [ Assignment: organization -defined critical information system components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance:   Adversaries can attempt to impede organizational operations by 
disru pting the supply of critical information system components or corrupting supplier 
operations. Safeguards to ensure adequate supplies of critical information system components 
include, for example: (i) the use  multiple suppliers throughout the supply chain for the 
identified critical components; and (ii) stockpiling of spare components to ensure operation 
during mission -critical times  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MA -6 and RA -9]. 
(12)(14) SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT  | IDENTITY AND TRACEA BILITY  
Establish and maintain  unique identification of [ Assignment: organization -defined supply chain 
elements, processes, and actors]  forpersonnel ] associated with  the information[ Assignment: 
organization- defined  system, critical system component, or information system 
service. components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Knowing who and what is in the supply chains of organizations is 
critical to gaining visibility into what is happe ning within such supply chains. It is also 
important for monitoring and identifying high- risk events and activi ties. Without reasonable 
visibility and traceability into supply chains (i.e., elements, processes, and actors personnel ), it 
is very difficult for organizations to understand,  and therefore manage risk, and ultimately  
reduce the likelihood of or susceptibi lity to adverse events. Uniquely identifying acquirer and 
integrator roles,  organizations, personnel, mission and element processes, testing and 
evaluation procedures, delivery mechanisms, support mechanisms, communicat ions/delivery 
paths , and disposal/fin al disposition activities as well as the components and tools 
used, Supply chain elements are systems or system  components that contain programmable 
logic and that are critically important to system functions. Supply chain proc esses include, for 
example, hardware, software, and firmw are development processes; shipping and handling 
procedures; personnel and p hysical security programs; configuration management tools, 
techniques, and measures to maintain provenance; or other programs, processes, or 
procedures  associated with the production and distribution of supply chain elements. Supply 
chain personnel are individuals in the supply chain with specific roles and responsibilities 
related to, for example, the secure development, delivery, maintenance, and disposal of a 
system or system component. Tracking the unique identifiers of supply chain elements, 
processes, and personnel  establishes a foundational identity structure for assessment of supply 
chain activities . For example,  labeling (  and for the establishment  and maintenance of 
provenance. For example, supply chain elements may be labeled using serial numbers ) and 
tagging ( or tagged using radio -frequency  identification tags ) individual supply chain 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 216 elements including software packages , modules, and hardware d evices , and processes 
associated with those elements can be used for this purpose. . These labels and tags can help 
provide  the organization better visibility into the provenance of that element.  Identification 
methods are sufficient to support the provenancea forensic investigation in the event of a 
supply chain issue compromise  or adverse supply chain event.  
Related Controls :  CM-8, IA-2, IA -8. 
(13)(15) SUPPLY CHAIN PROTECTION RISK MANAGEMENT  | PROCESSES TO ADDRESS WEAKNESSES OR 
DEFICIENCIES  
Establish a process or p rocesses to address weaknesses or deficiencies in supply chain elements 
identified duringin coordination with [ Assignment: organization- defined supply chain personnel ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Supply chain elements are system or system components that cont ain 
programmable logic and that are critically  important to system functions. Supply chain 
processes include, for example, hardware, software, and firmw are development processes; 
shipping and handling procedures; personnel and physical security programs; c onfiguration 
management tools, techniques, and measures to maintain provenance; or other programs, 
processes, or procedures  associated with the production and distribution of supply chain 
elements. Supply chain personnel are individuals with specific roles  and responsibilities in the 
supply chain. The evidence generated during the independent or organizational assessments of 
designated supply chain elements may be used to improve the supply chain processes and 
inform the organization’s supply chain risk management proces s. The evidence can also be 
leveraged in follow -on assessments. Evidence and other related documentation may be shared 
in accordance with organizational agreements  
Related Controls :  None .  
(16) SUPPLY CHAIN RISK MANAGEMENT  | PROVENANCE  
Document, monitor, and maintain valid provenance of [ Assignment: organization -defined systems, 
system components, and associated data].  
Supplemental Guidance : Every system and system component has a point of origin and may be 
changed throughout its  existence. Proven ance is the  chronology of the origin, development, 
ownership, location, and changes to a system or system component and associated data.  It 
may also include personnel and processes used to interact with or make modifications to the 
system, component, or as sociated data. Organizations consider developing procedures for 
allocating responsibilities for the creation, maintenance, and monitoring of provenance  for 
systems and components ; transferring provenance documentation and responsibility between 
organizatio ns; and preventing and monitoring for unauthorized changes to the provenance 
record s. Organizations consider developing methods to document, monitor, and maintain 
valid provenance baselines for systems, system components, and related data. Such actions 
help track, assess , and document changes to the provenance, including changes in supply 
chain elements or configuration, and ensure non -repudiation of provenance information and 
the provenance change records . 
Related Controls :  RA-9. 
References :  FIPS Publica tions  140-2, 180-4, 186-4, 202; NIST Special Publications 800- 30, 800-
161; NIST Interagency Report 7622 . 
SA-13 TRUSTWORTHINESS 
 Control :  The organization : 
c. Describes  the trustworthiness required in the [ Assignment: or ganization- defined information 
system , information system component, or information system service ] supporting its critical 
missions/business functions ; and  
d. Implements [ Assignment: organization- defined assurance overlay ] to achieve such 
trustworthiness.  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 217 Supplemental Guidance :  This control  helps organizations to make explicit trustworthiness decisions when 
designing , developing, and implementing information systems  that are needed to conduct critical 
organizational missions/business functions . Trustworthine ss is a characteristic/property  of an information 
system that expresses the degree to which the system can be expected to preserve the confidentiality, 
integrity, and avail ability of the information it processes, stores, or transmits .  Trustworthy informat ion 
systems are systems that are capable of being trusted to operate within defined levels of risk  despite the 
environmental disruptions, human errors, and purposeful attacks that are expected to occur in the specified 
environments of operation.  Trustworth y systems are important to mission/business success. Two  factors 
affecting the trustworthiness of information system s include: (i) security functionality (i.e., the security 
features, functions , and /or mechanisms  employed within the system  and its environm ent of operation ); and 
(ii) security assurance (i.e., the grounds for confidence that the security functionality is  effective in its  
application ). Developers , implementers , operators, and maintainers  of organizational information systems  
can increase the l evel of assurance (and trustworthiness), for example, by employing well -defined security 
policy m odels, structured and rigorous hardware, software , and firmware  development techniques, sound 
system/security engineering principles , and secure configuration settings  (defined by a set of assurance -
related security controls  in Appendix E ). 
Assurance is also based on the assessment of evidence produced during the system development life cycle.  
Critical missions/business functions are supported by high -impact sys tems and the associated assurance 
requirements for such systems. T he additional assurance controls in Table E -4 in Appendix E (designated 
as optional) can be used to develop and implement high- assurance solutions for specific inform ation 
systems and system  components using the concept of overlays described in Appendix I.  Organizations 
select assurance overlays that have been developed , validated, and approved  for community adoption  (e.g., 
cross- organization, governmentwide) , limiting the development of such overlays on an organization -by-
organization basis. Organizations can conduct criticality analyses as described in SA -14, to determine the 
information systems, system components, or information system services that require high -assurance 
solutions. Trustwo rthiness requirements and assurance overlays  can be described  in the security plans for 
organizational information systems. Related controls: RA -2, SA -4, 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into  SA-8, SA-14, SC-3.]. 
SA-14 CRITICALITY ANALYSIS  
  The organization ident ifies critical information system components  and functions by performing 
a criticality analysis for [ Assignment: organization- defined information systems, information 
system components, or information system services ] at [ Assignment: organization- defined decision 
points in the system development life cycle ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Criticality analysis is a key tenet  of supply chain risk management and 
informs  the prioritization of supply chain protection activities such as attack surface reduction, use 
of all-source intelligence, and tailored acquisition strategies. Information s ystem engineers can 
conduct  an end-to-end functional decomposition  of an information system to identify mission -
critical functions and components. The functional decomposition inclu des the identification of 
core organizational missions  supported by the system , decomposition into the specific functions to 
perform those missions, and traceability to the hardware, software, and firmware components that 
implement those functions, includi ng when the functions are shared by many components within 
and beyond the information system boundary. Information system c omponents that allow for 
unmediated access to critical co mponents or functions are considered critical due to th e inherent 
vulnerabil ities such components create. Criticality is assessed in terms of the impact of the 
function or component failure on the ability of the component t o complete the organizational 
missions  supported by the information system . A criticality analysis is perform ed whenever an 
architecture or design is being developed or modified, including upgrades.  Related controls: CP -2, 
PL-2, PL -8, PM -1, SA-8, SA-12, SA-13, SA-15, SA -20. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
CRITICALITY ANALYSIS | CRITICAL COMPONENTS WITH  NO VIABLE AL TERNATIVE SOURCING  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA-20RA -9]. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 218 SA-15 DEVELOPMENT PROCESS, STANDARDS, AND TOOLS  
 Control : 
a. Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to follow a 
documented development process that : 
1. Explicitly add resses security requirements;  
2. Identifies the standards and tools used in the development process;  
3. Documents the  specific tool options and tool configurations used in the development 
process; and  
4. Documents, manages, and ensures the integrity of changes to t he process and/or tools 
used in development; and  
b. Review the development process, standards, tools, tool options, and tool configurations 
[Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] to determine if the process, standards, tools, 
tool options and tool confi gurations selected and employed can satisfy [ Assignment: 
organization- defined security and privacy requirements ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Development tools include, for example, programming languages and 
computer -aided design systems.  Reviews of developmen t processes can include, for example, the 
use of maturity models to determine the potential effectiveness of such processes.  Maintaining the 
integrity of changes to tools and processes facilitates effective supply chain risk assessment and 
mitigation . Such integrity requires robust configuration control throughout the life  cycle 
(including design, system  development , transport, delivery, integration , and maintenance)  life 
cycle to track authorized changes and to prevent unauthorized changes.  
Related Control s:  MA-6, SA-3, SA-4, SA -8, SA -11, SA -12. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | QUALITY METRICS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to : 
(a) Define quality metrics at the beginning of the develop ment process; and  
(b) Provide evidence of meeting the quality metrics [ Selection  (one or more) : [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency] ; [Assignment: organization- defined program review 
smilestones] ; upon delivery ]. 
Supplemental Guidance:   Organizations use quality metrics to establish minimum acceptable 
levels of  information system  quality. Metrics may include  quality gates which  are collections 
of completion criteria  or sufficiency standards representing the satisfactory execution of 
particular specific  phases of the system development project . A quality gate , for example, may 
require the elimination of all compiler warnings or an explicita  determin ation that such 
warnings have no impact on the effectiveness of required security or privacy capabilities. 
During the execution phases of development projects,  quality gates provide clear, 
unambiguous indications of progress. Other metrics apply to the entire development project. 
These metrics can include defin ing the severity thresholds of vulnerabilities , for example, 
requiring no known vulnerabilities in the delivered system with a Common Vulnerability 
Scoring System (CVSS) severity of Medium or High.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | SECURITY TRACKING T OOLS  
Require  the devel oper of the system , system component , or system service to select and  employ a  
security  tracking tool for use during the development process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  System development teams select  and deploy security tracking tools, 
including, for example , vulnerability/work item tracking system s that facilitate assign ment , 
sorting, filter ing, and track ing of completed work items or tasks  associated with system 
development processes . 
Related Controls :  SA-11. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 219 (3) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | CRITICALITY ANALYSIS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to perform a criticality  
analysis at [Assignment: organization- defined breadth/depth] and at [Assignment: organization -
defined  decision points in the system develop ment life cycle].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement provides developer input to the criticality 
analysis performed by organizations  in SA -14. Developer input is essential to such analysis 
because organizations may not have access to detailed  design documentation for system 
components that are developed as commercial off -the-shelf products. Such design 
documentation includes, for example, functional specifications, high -level designs, low -level 
designs, and source code and hardware schematics . Criticality analysis is important for 
organizational systems that are designated as high value assets. Such assets can be moderate-  
or high -impact systems due to the potential for serious, severe, or catastrophic adverse 
impacts on organizational missions  or business functions.  
Related Controls :  RA-9. 
(4) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | THREAT MODELING AND VULNERABILITY ANALY SIS  
The organization requires that developers perform threat modeling and a vulnerability analysis for 
the information sys tem at [Assignment: organization- defined breadth/ depth] that: 
Uses [Assignment: organization -defined information concerning impact, environment of operations, known or 
assumed threats, and acceptable risk levels] ; 
Employs [ Assignment: organization- defined tools and methods ]; and Produces evidence that meets [ Assignment: 
organization- defined acceptance criteria].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Related control: SA -4. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -11(2)].  
(5) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | ATTACK SURFACE R EDUCTION  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to reduce attack 
surfaces to [Assignment: organization -defined thresholds ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Attack surface reduction is closely aligned with  developer threat and 
vulnerability analys es and system architecture and design. Attack surface reduction is a means 
of reducing risk to organizations by giving attackers less opportunity to exploit weaknesses or 
deficiencies (i.e., potential vulnerabilities) within systems, syste m components, and system 
services . Attack surface reduction includes, for example, employing the concept of layered 
defenses ; applying the principles of least privilege and least functionality  (i.e., restricting 
ports, protocols, functions, and services), ; deprecating unsafe functions ; applying secure 
software development practices including, for example, reducing the amount of code 
executing and reducing entry points available to unauthorized users;  and eliminating 
application programming interfaces (APIs)  that are vulnerable to cyber attacks.  
Related Controls :  AC-6, CM -7, RA -3. 
(6) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | CONTINUOUS IMPROVEM ENT  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to  implement  an 
explicit  process to co ntinuously improve the development process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Developers of systems, system components, and system services 
consider the effectiveness and efficiency of their current development processes for meeting 
quality objectives and for addres sing the security and privacy capabilities in current threat 
environments.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(7) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | AUTOMATED VULNERABI LITY ANALYSIS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to : 
(a) Perform an automated vulnerability analysis using [ Assignment: organization- defined tools ]; 
(b) Determine the exploitation potential for discovered vulnerabilities;  
(c) Determine potential risk mitigations for delivered vulnerabilities; and  
(d) Deliver the outputs of t he tools and results of the analysis  to [Assignment: organization-
defined personnel or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 220 Related Controls :  RA-5, SA-11. 
(8) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | REUSE OF THREAT AND VULNERABILITY INFOR MATION  
Require  the developer of the system , system component , or system service to use threat modeling 
and vulnerability analyses from similar systems, components, or services to  inform the current 
development process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Analysis of vul nerabilities found in similar software  applications can 
inform potential design and  implementation issues for systems under development.  Similar 
systems or system components may exist within developer organizations.  Authoritative  
Vulnerability information is available from a variety of public and private sector sources 
including, for example, the NIST National Vulnerability Database.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(9) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | USE OF LIVE DATA  
The organization approves, documents, and controls the use of live data in development and test 
environments for the information system , system component, or information system service.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The use of live data in preproduction environments can result in 
significant risk to organization s. Organizations can minimize such risk by using test or 
dummy data during the development and testing of information systems, information system 
components, and information system services.  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -3(2)].  
(10) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STAN DARDS , AND TOOLS | INCIDENT RESPONSE P LAN  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to  provide , implement, 
and test an incident response plan.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The incident response plan provided by developers of syst ems, system 
components, and system services may be incorporated into organizational incident response 
plans.  This information provides  the type of incident response information  that is  not readily 
available to organizations. Such information may be extreme ly helpful, for example, when 
organizations respond to vulnerabilities in commercial off -the-shelf products.  
Related Controls :  IR-8. 
(11) DEVELOPMENT PROCESS , STANDARDS , AND TOOLS | ARCHIVE SYSTEM  OR COMPONENT  
Require the developer of the system  or system com ponent  to archive the system  or component to 
be released  or delivered together with the corresponding evidence supporting the final security 
and privacy review.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Archiving system or system components requires the developer to 
retain key development artifacts including, for example, hardware specifications, source code, 
object code, and any relevant documentation from the development process that can provide a 
readily available configuration baseline of information that can be helpful duri ng information 
system/ for system and component upgrades or modifications.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
SA-16 DEVELOPER -PROVIDED TRAINING  
 Control :  Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to provide  
[Assignment: organization -defined training] on the correct use and operation of the implemented 
security and privacy functions, controls, and/or mechanisms.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to external and internal (in -house) developers. Training 
of personnel is an essential element to ensure  the effectiveness of the security and privacy controls  
implemented within organizational systems . Training options include , for example,  web-based and 
computer -based training; classroom -style training; and hands -on training. Organizations can also 
request training materials from developers to conduct in -house training or offer self -training to 
organizational personnel. Organizations determine the type of training necessary and may require 
different types of train ing for different security and privacy functions, controls, and  mechanisms . 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 221 Related Controls :  AT-2, AT -3, PE- 3, SA -4, SA -5. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SA-17 DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN  
Control :  Require the developer of  the system , system component , or system service to produce  a 
design specification and security architecture that : 
a. Is consistent with and supportive of the organization’s security architecture which is 
established within and is an integrated part of the organization’s enterprise architecture;  
b. Accurately and completely describes the required security functionality, and  the allocation of 
security controls among physical and logical components ; and  
c. Express es how individual security functions, mechanisms, and s ervices work together to 
provide required security capabilities and a unified approach to protection.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control is primarily directed at external developers, although it could 
also be used for internal (in -house) development . In contrast, PL-8 is primarily directed at internal 
developers to ensur e that organizations develop a security architecture and that the architecture is 
integrated or tightly coupled to the enterprise architecture.  This distinction is important when 
organizat ions outsource the development of systems, system components, or system services to 
external entities, and when there is a requirement  to demonstrate consistency with the 
organization’s enterprise architecture and security architecture of the organization . ISO/IEC 15408 
provides additional information on security architecture and design including, for example, formal 
policy models, security -relevant components, formal and informal correspondence, conceptually 
simple design, and structuring for least privile ge and testing . 
Related Controls :  PL-2, PL-8, PM -7, SA -3, SA -4, SA -8. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESI GN | FORMAL POLICY MODEL   
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to : 
(a) Produce, as an integral part of the development process, a formal policy model describing the 
[Assignment: organization- defined elements of organizational security policy] to be enforced; 
and 
(b) Prove that the formal policy model is internally consistent and sufficient to enforce the 
defined elements of the organizational security policy when implemented.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Formal model s describe specific behavior s or security polic ies using 
formal language s, thus enabling the correctness of those behavior s and policies  to be formally 
proven. Not all components of systems can be modeled. Generally, formal specifications are 
scoped to the specific behaviors or policies of interest, for example, nondiscretionary access 
control policies. O rganization s choose the formal modeling language and approach based on 
the nature of the behavior s and policies  to be described and the available tools.  Examples of 
formal  modeling tools incl ude Gypsy and Zed.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESI GN | SECURITY -RELEVAN T COMPONENTS  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to : 
(a) Define  security -relevant hardware, so ftware, and firmware ; and 
(b) Provide  a rationale that the  definition for security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware is 
compl ete. 
Supplemental Guidance:   The s ecurity -relevant hardware, software, and firmware r epresent the 
portion of the system, component, or service that must be trusted to perform  correctly to 
maintain  required security properties.  
Related Controls :  SA-5. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 222 (3) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHI TECTURE AND DESIGN | FORMAL CORRESPONDEN CE  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to : 
(a) Produce , as an integral part of the development  process, a formal top -level specification that 
specifies the interf aces to security -relevant hardware, so ftware, and firmware in terms of 
exceptions, error messages, and effects;  
(b) Show via proof to the extent feasible with additional informal demonstration as necessary, 
that the formal top- level specification is consistent  with the formal policy model;  
(c) Show via informal demonstration, that the formal top -level specification  completely covers the 
interfaces to security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware;  
(d) Show that the formal top- level specification  is an accurate desc ription of the implemented 
security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware ; and 
(e) Describe the security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware mechanisms not addressed  
in the formal top -level specification  but strictly internal to the security -relevant  hardware, 
software, and firmware.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Correspondence is an  important  part of the assurance gained through 
modeling . It demonstrates that the implementation is an accurate transformation of the model, 
and that any additional code or implementation details that are present have  no impact on the 
behavior s or policies being modeled. Formal methods can be used to show that the high -level 
security properties are satisfied by the formal system description, and that the formal system 
descriptio n is correctly implemented by a description of some lower level, for example a 
hardware description.  Consistency betwe en the formal top -level specification and the formal 
policy models is generally not amenable to being fully proven. Therefore, a  combinati on of 
forma l and informal methods may be needed to show such consistency. Consistency between 
the formal top -level specification and the actual implementation may require the use of an 
informal demonstration due to limitations in the applicability of forma l methods to prove that 
the specification  accurately reflects the implementation. Hardware, software, and firmware 
mechanisms strictly internal to security -relevant hardw are, software, and firmware include,  
for example,  mapping registers and direct  memory input  and output. 
Related Controls :  SA-5. 
(4) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESI GN | INFORMAL CORRESPONDENCE  
Require the developer of the system , system component , or system service to : 
(a) Produce , as an integral part of the development  process, an inform al descriptive top-level 
specification that specifies the interfaces to security -relevant hardware, so ftware, and 
firmware in terms of exceptions, error messages, and effects;  
(b) Show via [ Selection: informal demonstration, convincing argument with formal met hods as 
feasible] that the descriptive top-level specification  is consistent with the formal policy model;  
(c) Show via informal demonstration, that the descriptive top-level specification  completely 
covers the interfaces to security -relevant hardware, softwar e, and firmware ; 
(d) Show that the descriptive top-level specification  is an accurate description of the interfaces to 
security -relevant hardware, s oftware, and firmware ; and 
(e) Describe the security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware mechanisms not addressed  
in the descriptive top-level specification  but strictly internal to the security -relevant hardware, 
software, and firmware.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Correspondence is an  important  part of the assurance gained through 
modeling . It demonstrates that the i mplementation is an accurate transformation of the model, 
and that any additional code or implementation details present has no impact on the behavior s 
or policies being modeled.  Consistency between  the descriptive top -level specification (i.e., 
high-level /low-level design) and the formal policy model is generally not amenable to being 
fully proven. Therefore, a combination of formal  and informal methods may be needed to 
show such consistency. Hardware, software, and firmware mechanisms strictly internal to  
security -relevant hardw are, software, and firmware include,  for example,  mapping registers 
and direct  memory input  and output. 
Related Controls :  SA-5. 
(5) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESI GN | CONCEPTUALLY SIMPLE  DESIGN  
Require the developer of the s ystem , system component , or system service to : 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 223 (a) Design and structure the security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware to use a 
complete, conceptually simple protection mechanism with precisely defined semantics; and  
(b) Internal ly structur e the security -relevant hardware, software, and firmware with specific regard 
for this mechanism.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SC-3. 
(6) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESI GN | STRUCTURE FOR TESTI NG  
Require  the developer of the system , system component , or system service to structure security -
relevant hardware, software, and firmware to facilitate testing.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SA-5, SA -11. 
(7) DEVELOPER SECURITY ARCHITECTURE AND DESI GN | STRUCTURE FOR LEAST  PRIVILEGE  
Require  the developer of the system , system component , or system service to structure security -
relevant hardware, software, and firmware to facilitate controlling access with least privilege.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC-5, AC -6. 
References :  ISO/IEC 15408; NIST Special Publication 800 -160. 
SA-18 TAMPER RESISTANCE AND DETECTION  
 Control :  Implement a ta mper protection program for the system, system component, or  system 
service.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Anti -tamper technologies , tools,  and techniques provide a level of 
protection for critical systems  and system components , and information technology produc ts 
against many  threats including modification, reverse engineering , modification , and substitution. 
Strong identification combined with tamper resistance and/or tamper detection is essential to 
protecting systems and components , and  products  during distri bution and when in use.  
Related Controls :  PE-3, SA -12, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TAMPER RESISTANCE AN D DET ECTION | MULTIPLE PHASES OF SDLC SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT L IFE CYCLE   
Employ anti -tamper technologies, tools, and techniques during multiple phases in the  system 
development life cycle including design, development, integration, operations, and maintenance.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations use a combination of hardware and software techniques 
for tamper resistance and detection. Organizations employ ob fuscation and self -checking, for 
example, to make reverse engineering and modifications more difficult, time -consuming, and 
expensive for adversaries. The customization of systems and system components can make 
substitutions easier to detect and therefore limit damage.  
Related Controls :  SA-3. 
(2) TAMPER RESISTANCE AN D DETECTION | INSPECTION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS OR COMPONENTS  
Inspect  [Assignment: organization -defined systems or system components] [Selection (one or 
more): at random ; at [Assignment: organizati on-defined frequency],  upon [Assignment: 
organization- defined indications of need for inspection]] to detect tampering.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses physical and logical tampering 
and is typically applied to mobile devices, no tebook computers, or other system components 
taken out of organization -controlled areas. Indications of a need for inspection include, for 
example, when individuals return from travel to high -risk locations.  
Related Controls :  SI-4.  
References :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 224 SA-19 COMPONENT AUTHENTICITY  
 Control : 
a. Develop and implement anti -counterfeit  policy and procedures that include  the means to 
detect and prevent counterfeit components  from entering the system ; and  
b. Report counterfeit system components to [ Selection (one or more): source of counterfeit 
component ; [Assignment: organization- defined external reporting organizations ]; 
[Assignment: organization -defined personnel or roles ]].      
Supplemental Guidance :  Sources of counterfeit components include, for example, manufact urers, 
developers, vendors, and contractors. Anti -counterfeiting policy and procedures support tamper 
resistance and provide a level of protection against the introduction of malicious code. External 
reporting organizations include, for example, US -CERT.  
Related Controls :  PE-3, SA -12, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) COMPONENT AUTHENTICI TY | ANTI-COUNTERFEIT TRAINING   
Train [ Assignment: organization -defined personnel or roles ] to detect counterfeit system 
components (including ha rdware, software, and firmware).  
Supplemental Guidance:   None.  
Related Controls :  AT-3. 
(2) COMPONENT AUTHENTICI TY | CONFIGURATION CONTROL FOR COMPONENT SERVICE AND REPAIR  
Maintain configuration control over [ Assignment: organization- defined system components] 
awaiting service or repair and  serviced  or repaired component s awaiting return to service.  
Supplemental Guidance:   None.  
Related Controls :  CM-3. 
(3) COMPONENT AUTHENTICI TY | COMPONENT DISPOSAL  
Dispose of system components using [ Assignment: organization -defined techniques and 
methods ]. 
Supplemental Guidance:   Proper disposal of system components helps to prevent such 
components from entering the gray market.  
Related Controls :  MP-6. 
(4) COMPONENT AUTHENTICI TY | ANTI-COUNTERFEIT SCANNING   
Scan for counterfeit system components [Assignment: orga nization -defined frequency] . 
Supplemental Guidance:   None.  
Related Controls :  RA-5. 
References :  None . 
SA-20 CUSTOMIZED DEVELOPMENT OF CRITICAL COMPONENTS  
 Control :  Re-implement or custom develops [ Assignment: organization- defined critical system 
components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations determine that certain system components likely cannot be 
trusted due to specific threats  to and vulnerabilities in those components,  and for which there are 
no viable security controls to adequately mitigate the resulting risk.  Re-implement ation  or custom 
develop ment  of such components helps to sati sfy requirement s for higher assurance. This is 
accomplished by initiating changes to system components (including hardware, software, and 
firmware) such that the standa rd attacks by adversaries are less likely to succeed . In situations 
where no alternative sourcing is available and organizations choose not to re- implement or custom 
develop critical system components, additional safeguards can be employed. These include, for 
example, enhanced auditing; restrictions on source code and system utility access; and protection 
from deletion of system and application files.  
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 225 Related Controls :  CP-2, RA -9, SA -8. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
SA-21 DEVELOPER SCREEN ING 
 Control :  Require that the developer of [ Assignment : organization- defined system , system  
component , or system service ]: 
a. Have appropriate access authorizations as determined by  assigned  [Assignment: organization-
defined official government duties ]; 
b. Satisfy [ Assignment: organization- defined additional personnel screening criteria] ; and  
c. Provide information that the access authorizations and screening criteria specified in a. and b. 
are satisfied.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control is directed at extern al developers. Because the system, system 
component, or system service may be employed  in critical activities essential to the national or 
economic security interests of the United States, organizations have a strong interest in ensuring 
that the developer  is trustworthy. The degree of trust required of the developer may need to be 
consistent with that of the individuals accessing the system/component/service once deployed. 
Examples of authorization and personnel screening criteria include clearances , backg round checks, 
citizenship, and nationality.  Trustworthiness of developers may also include a review and analysis 
of company ownership and any relationships the company has with entities potentially affecting the quality and reliability of the systems, comp onents, or services being developed.  
 Satisfying required access authorizations and personnel screening criteria includes, for example, 
providing a listing list of all the individuals who are authorized to perform development activities 
on the selected syst em, system component, or system service so that organizations can validate 
that the developer has satisfied the authorization and screening requirements.  
Related Controls :  PS-2, PS -3, PS- 6, PS -7, SA -4. 
Control Enhancements :  
(1) DEVELOPER SCREENING | VALIDATION OF SCREENING  
(2) The organization requires the developer of the information system, system component, or 
information system service take [ Assignment: organization -defined actions] to ensure that the 
required access authorizations and screening criteria are satisfied.  
 [Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -21]. 
References :  None . 
SA-22 UNSUPPORTED SYSTEM COMPONENTS  
 Control :  Replace system components when support for the components is no longer available from 
the developer, vendor, or manufacturer . 
(1) Provides  justification and documents approval for the continued use of unsupported system 
components required to satisfy mission /business  needs.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Support for system components includes, for example, software patches, 
firmware updates, replacement  parts, and maintenance contracts.  Unsupported components, for 
example, when vendors no longer provide critical software patches  or product updates,  provide a 
substantialan  opportunity  for adversaries to exploit new weaknesses discovered in the currently 
installed components. Exceptions to replacing unsupported system components may include, for 
example, systems that provide critical mission or business capability where newer technologies are 
not available or where the systems are so isolated that installin g replacement components is not an 
option.  
Related Controls :  PL-2, SA -3. 
CHAPTER THREE   PAGE 226 Control Enhancements : 
(1) UNSUPPORTED SYSTEM C OMPONENTS | ALTERNATIVE SOURCES FOR CONTINUED SUPPO RT  
Provide [ Selection (one or more): in- house support; [ Assignment: organization- defined  support 
from external providers]] for unsupported system components . 
Supplemental Guidance:   This control enhancement addresses the need to provide continued 
support for system components that are no longer supported by the original manufacturers, 
develop ers, or vendors when such components remain essential to organizational mission and 
business operations. Organizations can establish in -house support, for example, by developing 
customized patches for critical software components or alternatively, obtain t he services of 
external providers who through contractual relationships, provide ongoing support for the 
designated unsupported components. Such contractual relationships can include, for example, 
Open Source Software value -added vendors.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None . 
  
DEVELOPMENT OF SYSTEMS, COMPONENTS,  AND SERVICES  
With a renewed  nation -wide emphasis on  the use of trustworthy systems and supply chain 
security, it is essential that organizations  can express their security  and privacy requirements 
with clarity and specificity to engage industry and obtain  the systems, components, and services 
necessary for mission/business success.  Accordingly, this publication provides a comprehensive 
set of controls in the System and Services Acquisition (SA) family that address requirements for 
the development of systems,  components, and system services. To that end, many of the 
controls in the SA family are directed at developers of those systems, components, and services. 
It is important for organizations to recognize that the scope of the controls in that family inclu des 
system, component, and service development and the developers associated with such development whether the development is conducted either internally or externally  by industry 
partners (i.e., manufacturers, vendors, integrators) through the contracting  and acquisition 
processes. The affected controls in the control catalog include SA- 8, SA -10, SA -11, SA- 15, SA -16, 
SA-17, SA -20, and SA -21. 
 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 227 3.19   SYSTEM AND COMMUN ICATIONS PROTECTION  
Quick link to System and Communications Protection summary table  
SC-1 SYSTEM AND COMMUNICATIONS PROTECTION POLICY AND PROCEDURES   
Control : 
a. Develop, doc ument, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A system and communications protection policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and c ompliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to facilitate the imple mentation of the system and communications protection 
policy and the associated system and communications protection  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
system and communications protection policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  system and communications protection: 
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the system and communications pr otection procedures implement the system and 
communications protection policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the system and 
communications protection policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the SC 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Compr ehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organiz ation s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for the security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  TheProcedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the personnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be docum ented in system security and plans or in one or more separate documents. 
It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational risk 
management strategy is a key factor in establishing policy and procedures . or procedure . 
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS -8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-100. 
SC-2 APPLICATION PARTITIONING   
Control :  Separate user functionality , including user interface services , from system management 
functionality.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 228 Supplemental Guidance :  System management functionality inc ludes, for example, functions that are 
necessary to administer databases, network components, workstations, or servers . These functions 
typically require privileged user access.  The separation of user function s from system management 
function s is either ph ysical or logical. Organizations implement separation of system management 
functions from user functions, for example, by using different computers, instances of operating 
system s, central processing units,  or network addresses ; by employing  virtualization  techniques; or 
some combination of these or other methods.  This type of separation  includes, for example,  web 
administrative interfaces that use separat e authentication methods for users of any other  system 
resources. Separation of system and user functio ns may include isolating administrative interface s 
on different domain s and with additional access controls.  
Related Controls :  AC-6, SA -4, SA -8, SC -3, SC -7, SC -22, SC -32, SC -39. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) APPLICATION PARTITIO NING | INTERFACES FOR NON -PRIVILEGE D USERS  
Prevent the presentation of system management -related  functionality at an interface for non -
privileged users.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement ensure s that system administration options  
including administrator privileges, are not available to general users  (including prohibiting. 
This type of restricted access also prohibit s the use of the grey -out option commonly used to 
eliminate accessibility to such information ). Such restrictions include, for  example,  not 
presenting . One potent ial solution is to withhold  administration options until user s establish 
session s with administrator privileges.  
Related Controls :  AC-3. 
References :  None.  
SC-3 SECURITY FUNCTION ISOLATION   
Control :  Isolate security functions from nonsecurity functions . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The system isolates security functions from nonsecurity functions  by 
means of an isolation boundary implemented via partitions and domains . Such isolation  controls 
access to and protects the integrity of the hardware, software, and firmware that perform those security functions . Systems implement code separation (i.e., separation of security functions from 
nonsecurity functions) in many  ways , for example, through the provision of security kernels via 
processor rings or processor mode s. For non -kernel code, security function isolation is often 
achieved through file system protections that protect the code on disk and address space 
protections that protect executing code. S ystems can restrict access to security functions using 
access co ntrol mechanisms and by implementing least privilege capabilities.  While the ideal is for 
all code within the defined security function isolation boundary to only contain security- relevant 
code , it is sometimes necessary to include nonsecurity functions wi thin the isolation boundary as 
an exception.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -6, AC-25, CM -2, CM -4, SA-4, SA -5, SA -8, SA-15, SA -17, SC-2, SC-
7, SC -32, SC -39, SI -16. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY FUNCTION IS OLATION | HARDWARE SEPARATION   
utilizes  underlyingUse  hardware separation mechanisms to implement  security function isolation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Hardware separation mechanisms include, for example, hardware ring 
architectures  that are commonly implemented within microprocessors , and hardware -enforced 
address segmentation used to support logically distinct storage objects with separate attributes 
(i.e., readable, writeable).  
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SECURITY FUNCTION IS OLATION | ACCESS AND FLOW CONTROL FUNCTI ONS  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 229 The information system isolatesIsolate security functions enforcing access and information flow 
control from nonsecurity functions and from other security functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Security function isolation occurs because of  implementation. The 
functions can still be scanned and monitor ed. Security functions that are potentially isolated 
from access and flow control enforcement functions include, for example, auditing, intrusion 
detection, and anti -virus functions.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SECURITY FUNCTION IS OLATION | MINIMIZE NONSECURI TY FUNCTIONALITY  
Minimize the number of nonsecurity functions included within the isolation boundary containing 
security functions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  In those instances where it is not feasible to achieve strict isolation of 
nonsecurity functions fro m security functions, it is necessary to take actions to minimize the 
nonsecurity- relevant function s within the security function boundary.  Nonsecurity functions 
contained within the isolation boundary are considered security -relevant  because errors or the 
maliciousness in such software, by virtue  of being within the boundary, can directly impact 
the security functions of systems. The  fundamental  design objective is that the specific 
portions of system s providing information security are of minimal siz e and  complexity . 
Minimizing the number of nonsecurity functi ons in the security -relevant system components 
allows designers and implementers to focus only  on those functions which are  necessary to 
provide the desire d security capability (typically access enfor cement) . By minimizing 
nonsecurity functions within the isolation boundaries, the amount of code that must be trusted 
to enforce security policies is significantly reduced, thus contributing to understandability.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) SECURITY FUNCTION ISOLATION | MODULE COUPLING AND COHESIVENESS  
Implement security functions as largely independent m odules that maximize internal cohesiveness 
within modules and minimize coupling between modules.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The reduction in inter -module intera ctions helps to constrain security 
functions and to manage complexity. The concepts of coupling and cohesion are important with respect to modularity in software design. Coupling refers to the dependencies that one 
module has on other modules. Cohesion ref ers to the relationship between different functions 
within a module . Best practices in software engineering rely on layering, minimization, and 
modular decomposition  to reduce and manage complexity. This produces software modules 
that are highly cohesive and loosely coupled.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) SECURITY FUNCTION IS OLATION | LAYERED STRUCTURES  
Implement security functions as a layered structure minimizing interactions between layers of the 
design and avoiding any dependence by lower layers on the funct ionality or correctness of higher 
layers.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The implementation of layered structures with minimized interactions 
among security functions and non -looping layers (i.e., lower -layer functions do not depend on 
higher -layer functions) fur ther enables the isolation of security functions and management of 
complexity.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-4 INFORMATION IN SHARED SYSTEM RESOURCES  
Control :  Prevent unauthorized and unintended information transfer via shared system reso urces.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control prevent s information , including encrypted representations of 
information,  produced by the actions of prior user s or role s (or the actions of process es acting on 
behalf of prior user s or role s) from being availabl e to current user s or role s (or current process es 
acting on behalf of current user s or role s) that obtain access to shared system resources  (e.g., 
registers, main memory, hard disk s) after those  resources  have  been released back to the system.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 230 This control  also applies to encrypted representations of information  system s. The c ontrol of 
informat ion in shared system resources is referred to as object reuse and residual information 
protection . This control does not address  information remanence which refers to  the residual 
representation of data that has been nominally erased or removed; (ii) deleted ; covert channels 
(including storage and timing channels) where shared system resources are manipulated to violate  
information flow restrictions ; or components withi n system s for which there are only single user s 
or roles. 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION IN SHARE D SYSTEM RESOURCES | SECURITY LEVELS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -4]. 
(2) INFORMATION IN SHARE D SYSTEM RESOURCES | MULTILEVEL  OR PERIODS PROCESSING  
Prevent unauthorized information transfer via shared resources in accordance with [ Assignment: 
organization- defined procedures ] when  system processing explicitly switches between different 
information classification levels or securi ty categor ies. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies when  there are explicit change s in 
information processing level s during system operations . This situation can occur , for example, 
during multilevel or periods processing with informati on at different classification levels or 
security categories . Organization -defined procedures may include , for example, approved 
sanitization processes for electronically stored information.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-5 DENIAL OF SERVIC E PROTECTION  
Control :  Protect against or limit the effects of the following types of denial of service 
attacks events : [Assignment: organization- defined types of denial of service attacks events  or 
references  to source s for such information]  by employing [ Assignment: organization- defined 
security safeguards ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Denial of service may occur because of  an attack by an adversary or a lack 
of internal planning to support organizational needs with respect to capacity and bandwidth. There 
are a variety of technologies exist available  to limit or in some cases,  eliminate the effects  of denial 
of service attacks events . For example, boundary protection devices can filter certain types of 
packets to protect system components  on internal organization al network s from being directly 
affected  by denial of service attacks. Employing increased network capacity and bandwidth 
combined with service redundancy also reduces  the susceptibility to denial of service attacks . 
events . 
Related Controls :  CP-2, IR-4, SC-6, SC-7, SC-40. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DENIAL OF SERVICE PROTECTION | RESTRICT INTERNAL USERS  
Restrict the ability of individuals  to launch [ Assignment: organization- defined denial of service 
attacks]  against other systems.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Restr icting the ability of individuals to launch denial of service attacks 
requires  that the mechanisms commonly used for such attacks are unavailable. Individuals of 
concern can include, for example, hostile insiders or external adversaries that have breached 
or compromised the system and are subsequently using the system as a platform to launch 
cyber attacks on third parties other individuals or organizations . Organizations can restrict the  
ability of individuals to connect  and transmit arbitrary information on  the transport medium 
(i.e., network, wired or  wireless spectrum network s). Organizations can also limit the ability of 
individuals to use excessive  system resources.  Protection against individuals having the 
ability to launch denial of service attacks may b e implemented on  specific system s or on 
boundary device s prohibiting egress to potential target systems.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 231 Related Controls :  None.  
(2) DENIAL OF SERVICE PROTECTION | CAPACITY , BANDWIDTH , AND REDUNDANCY  
Manage capacity, bandwidth, or other redundancy to limit t he effects of information flooding denial 
of service attacks.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Managing capacity ensures that sufficient capacity  is available to 
counter flooding attacks . Managing capacity may i nclude , for example,  establishing selected 
usage prior ities, quotas, or partitioning.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) DENIAL OF SERVICE PROTECTION | DETECTION AND MONITORING  
(a) Employ [Assignment: organization- defined monitoring tools ] to detect indicators of denial of 
service attacks against the system; and  
(b) Monitor [ Assignment: organization- defined system resources] to determine if sufficient 
resources exist to prevent effective denial of service attacks.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations consider utilization and capacity of system resources 
when managing risk from  denial of service due to malicious attacks. Denial of service attacks 
can originate from external or internal sources. System resources sensitive to denial of service 
include, for example, physical disk storage, memory, and CPU cycles. Examples of common 
safeguards used to prevent denial of service attacks related to storage utilization and capacity 
include, instituting disk quotas; configuring systems to automatically alert administrators 
when specific storage capacity thresholds are reached; using file compression technologies to 
maximize available storage space; and imposing separate partitions for system and user data.  
Related Controls :  CA-7, SI -4. 
References :  None.  
SC-6 RESOURCE AVAILABILITY  
Control :  Protect the availability of resources by allocating [ Assignment: organization- defined 
resources ] by [ Selection (one or more); priority; quota;  [Assignment: organization -defined 
security safeguards ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Priority protection prevent s lower -priority process es from delaying or 
interferin g with the system servicing higher -priority processes. Quotas prevent users or processes 
from obtaining more than predetermined amounts of resources. This control does not apply to 
system components for which there  are only single  users or role s. 
Related C ontrols :  SC-5. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-7  BOUNDARY PROTECTION  
Control :  
a. Monitor and control communications at the external boundary of the system and at key 
internal boundaries within the system;  
b. Implement subnetworks for public ly accessible system components that are [ Selection: 
physically; logically ] separated from internal organizational networks; and  
c. Connect to external networks or systems only through managed interfaces consisting of 
boundary protection devices arranged in accordance with an organizational  security and 
privacy architecture.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Managed interfaces include, for example, gateways, routers, firewalls, 
guards, network -based malicious code analysis and virtualization systems, or encrypted tunnel s 
implemented with in a security architecture (e.g., routers protecting firewalls or  application 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 232 gateways residing on protected subnetwork s).. Subnetworks that are physically or logically 
separated from internal networks are referred to as demilitarized zon es or DMZs.  Restricting or 
prohibiting  interfaces within organizational systems includes, for example, r estricting external web 
traffic  to designated web servers within managed interfaces and prohibiting external traffic that  
appears to be spoofing interna l address es. Organization s consider the shared nature of commercial 
telecommunications services in the i mplementation of security controls associated with the use of 
such services.  Commercial telecommunications services are commonly based on typically  provi ded 
by network components and consolidated management systems shared by all attached commercial 
customers . These services may also include third  party -provided access lin es and other service 
elements. S uch services may represent sources of increased risk d espite  contract security 
provisions.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, AC -17, AC -18, AC -19, AC -20, AU -13, CA-3, CM-2, CM- 4, CM-7, CM-
10, CP-8, CP-10, IR-4, MA-4, PE -3, PM -12, SC-5, SC-19, SC -32, SC -43. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PHYSICALLY SEPARATED SUBNETWORKS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -7]. 
(2) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PUBLIC ACCESS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -7]. 
(3) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ACCESS POINTS  
Limit the number of external network connections  to the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Limiti ng the number of external network connections facilitates more 
comprehensive monitoring of inbound and outbound communications traffic. T he Trusted 
Internet Connection  initiative is an example of limiting the number of external network 
connections . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | EXTERNAL TELECOMMUN ICATIONS SERVICES  
(a) Implement a managed interface for each external telecommunication service;  
(b) Establish a traffic flow policy for each managed interface;  
(c) Protect the confidentiality and integrity of  the information being transmitted across each 
interface;  
(d) Document each exception to the traffic flow policy with a supporting mission/business need 
and duration of that need;  and 
(e) Review exceptions to the traffic flow policy [Assignment: organization- defin ed frequency] and  
removes exceptions that are no longer supported by an explicit mission/business need.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, SC-8. 
(5) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DENY BY DEFAULT  — ALLOW BY EXCEPTION  
Deny network communications traffic by default and allow network communications traffic by 
exception  (i.e., deny all, permit by exception) .at managed interfaces.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to  both inbound and outbound 
network communications traffic. A deny -all, permit -by-exception network communications 
traffic policy ensures that only those system connections which are essential and approved are 
allowed . This requirement differs from CA -3(5) in that it applies to any type of network 
communications while CA -3(5) is applied to a system that is interconnected with another 
system . 
(6) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESPONSE TO RECOGNI ZED FAILURES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -7(18)]. 
(7) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT SPLIT TUNNE LING FOR REMOTE DEVI CES  
The information system , in conjunction with a remote device,  prevents thePrevent a remote device 
from simultaneously establishing  non-remote connections  with the system and communicating via 
some other connection to resources in external networks.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 233 Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is implemented in remote device s 
(e.g.,including, for example,  notebook  computer s, through configuration settings to disable 
split tunneling in those devices, and by preventing those configuration settings from being 
readily configurable by users. This control enhancement is implemented within the system by 
the detection of split tunneling (or of configuration settings that allow split tunneling) in the 
remote device, and by prohibiting the connection if the remote device is using split tunneling. 
Split tunneling might be desirable by remote users to communicate with local system resources such as printers or file servers. However, split tunneling can allow unauthorized 
external connections, making the system more vulnerable to attack and to exfiltration of 
organizational information . The use of VPNs for remote connections, when adequately 
provisioned with the appropriate security controls, may provide the organization with 
sufficient assurance that it can effectively treat such connections  as non -remote connections 
with respect to the objectives of confidentiality and integrity. VPNs provide a means for 
allowing non -remote communications paths from remote devices.  The use of an a dequately 
provisioned VPN does not eliminate  the need for prev enting split tunneling.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ROUTE TRAFFIC TO AUTHENTICATED PROXY SERVERS  
Route [ Assignment: organization -defined internal communications traffic]  to [Assignment: 
organization- defined external networks] through authenticated proxy servers at managed 
interfaces.  
Supplemental Guidance :  External networks are networks outside of organizational control. A 
proxy server is a server (i.e., system or application) that acts as an intermediary for clients 
requesting system r esources (e.g.,from non -organizational or other organizational servers. 
These system resources can include, for example,  files, connections, web pages, or services ) 
from other organizational servers. . Client requests established through an initial connection to 
the proxy server are evaluated to manage complexity and to provide additional protection by 
limiting direct connectivity. Web content filtering devices are one of the most common proxy 
servers providing access to the Internet. Proxy servers can support logging of individual 
Transmission Control Protocol sessions and blocking specific Uniform Resource Locators, Internet Protocol addresses , and domain names. Web proxies  can be configur ed with 
organization -defined lists of authorized and unauthorized web sites.  
Related Controls :  AC-3. 
(9) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESTRICT THREATENING OUTGOING COMMUNICA TIONS TRAFFIC   
(a) Detect and den y outgoing communications  traffic posing a threat to external systems; and  
(b) Audit the identity of internal users associated with denied  communications.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Detecting outgoing communications traffic from internal actions that 
may pose threat s to external systems is known as extrusion detection. Extrusion detection is 
carried out at system boundar ies as part of managed i nterfaces. This capability includes the 
analysis of incoming and outgoing communications traffic while searching  for indications of 
internal threat s to the security of external systems.  Such threats include, for example, traffic 
indicative of denial of ser vice attacks and traffic containing malicious code.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU-6, SC -5, SC -38, SC -44, SI -3, SI-4. 
(10) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT UNAUTHORIZED EXFILTRATION   
(a) Prevent the unauthorized exfiltration of information  across managed interfaces. ; and  
(b) Conduct exfiltration tests [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Safeguards  implemented by organizations This control enhancement 
applies  to prevent unauthorized intentional and unintentional  exfiltration of information . 
Safeguards  to prevent exfiltration of information  from system s may be  implemented at 
internal endpoints, external boundaries, and across managed interfaces and include, for 
example , strict adherence to protocol formats; monitoring for beaconing activity from 
system s; monitoring for  steganography;  disconnecting external network interfaces except 
when explicitly needed;  disassembling and reassembling packet headers; employing traffic 
profile analysis to detect deviations from the volume  and types of traffic exp ected within 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 234 organizations or call backs to command and control centers ; and implementing data loss and 
data leakage prevention tools . Devices that enforc e strict adherence to protocol formats 
include, for example, deep packet inspectio n firewalls and XML ga teways. These devices 
verify adherence to protocol formats and specifications  at the application layer and identify 
vulnerabilities that cannot be detected by devices operating at the network or transport layer s. 
This control enhancement is analogous with data loss/data leakage prevention and is closely 
associated with cross -domain solutions and system guards enforcing information flow 
requirements.  
Related Controls :  SI-3. 
(11) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | RESTRICT INCOMING C OMMUNICATIONS TRAFFI C  
Only allow incoming  communications from [ Assignment: organization -defined authorized sources ] 
to be routed to [ Assignment: organization- defined authorized destinations ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement provides determination s that source and 
destination addr ess pair s represent  authorized /allowed  communications. Such determination s 
can be based on several factors including, for example, the presence of source/destination such 
address pairs in the lists of authorized/ allowed communications ; the absence of such address 
pairs in lists of unauthorized/disallowed pairs ; or meeting more general rules for 
authorized/ allowed source and destination pairs.  
Related Controls :  AC-3. 
(12) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | HOST -BASED PROTECTION  
Implement  [Assignment: organization -defined hos t-based boundary protection mechanisms]  at 
[Assignment: organization- defined  system components] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Host-based boundary protection mechanism s include , for e xample, 
host-based firewalls. Examples of system components employing host -based boundary 
protection mechanisms include servers, workstations , notebook computers , and mobile 
devices.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(13) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ISOLATION OF SECURI TY TOOLS , MECHANISMS , AND SUPPORT COMPONENTS  
Isolate [ Assignment: organization- define d information security tools, mechanisms, and support 
components ] from other internal system components by implementing  physically separate 
subnet works with managed interfaces to other components  of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Physically separate s ubnetworks with managed interfaces  are useful , 
for example, in isolating  computer network defenses from critical operational processing 
networks to prevent adversaries from discovering the analysis and  forensics techniques of 
organizations.  
Related Control s:  SC-2, SC -3. 
(14) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PROTECTS AGAINST UN AUTHORIZED PHYSICAL CONNECTIONS  
Protect against unauthorized physical connections at [ Assignment: organization -defined managed 
interfaces].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Systems operating at different sec urity categories or classification 
levels may share common physical and environmental controls, since the systems may share 
space within organizational the same  facilities. In practice, it is possible that these separate 
systems may share common equipment r ooms, wiring closets,  and cable distribution paths. 
Protection against unauthorized physical connections can be achieved, for example, by 
employing clearly identified and physically separated cable trays, connection frames, and 
patch panels for each side o f managed interfaces with physical access controls enforcing 
limited authorized access to these items.  
Related Controls :  PE-4, PE- 19. 
(15) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ROUTE PRIVILEGED NE TWORK ACCESSES  
Route all networked, privileged accesses through a dedicated, managed interface for purposes of 
access control and auditing.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 235 Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -3, AU -2, SI-4. 
(16) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PREVENT DISCOVERY O F COMPONENTS AND DEVICES  
Prevent  the discovery of specific system components com posingthat represent  a managed 
interface.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement protect s network addresses of system 
components that are part of managed interface s from discovery through common tools and 
techniques used to identify devices on ne tworks.  Network addresses are not available for 
discovery  (e.g., network address not published or entered in domain name system s),, requiri ng 
prior knowledge for access.  This can be accomplished by not publishing network addresses or 
entering the addresses  in domain name system s. Another obfuscation technique is to 
periodically  change network addresses.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(17) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | AUTOMATED ENFORCEME NT OF PROTOCOL FORMA TS  
Enforce adherence to protocol format s. 
Supplemental Guidance:   Exa mples of system components  that enforce protocol formats include  
deep packet inspection fi rewalls and XML gateways. Such components  verify adherence to 
protocol formats and specification s at the application layer and identify vulnerabilities that 
cannot be  detected by devices operating at the network or transport layer s. 
Related Controls :  SC-4. 
(18) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | FAIL SECURE  
The information system fails securely Prevent systems from entering unsecure  states in the event 
of an operational failure of a bo undary protection device .  
Supplemental Guidance :  Fail secure is a condition achieved by employing system mechanisms 
to ensure that in the event of operational failure s of boundary protection devices  at managed 
interface s (e.g., router s, firewalls , guard s, system s do not enter into unsecure states  where 
intended security properties no longer hold. Examples of managed interfaces include router s, 
firewall s, and application gateway s residing on  protected subnetwork s commonly referred t o 
as demilitarized zones ), information system s do not enter into unsecure state s where intended 
security properties no longer hold. . Failure s of boundary protection device s cannot lead to, or 
cause information external to the devices  to enter the device s, nor can failure s permit 
unauthorized information release s. 
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP -12, SC -24. 
(19) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | BLOCK COMMUNICATION FROM NON -ORGANIZATIONALLY CON FIGURED HOSTS  
Block inbound and outbound communications traffic between [ Assignment: organization- defined 
commu nication clients] that are independently configured by end users and external service 
providers.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Communication clients independently configured by end users and 
external service providers include, for example, instant messaging clie nts. Traffic b locking 
does not apply to communication clients that are configured by organizations to perform 
authorized functions.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(20) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DYNAMIC ISOLATION AND SEGREGATION  
Provide the capability to dynamically isol ate or segregate [ Assignment: organization -defined 
system components] from other system components.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The capability  to dynamically isolate or segregate certain internal 
components  of organizational system s is useful when it is necess ary to partition or separate 
certain system components of dubious questionable  origin from those  components possessing 
greater trustworthiness. Component isolation reduces  the attack surface of organizational 
systems . Isolating selected system components  can also limit the damage from successful 
cyber attacks  when those such attacks  occur.  
Related Controls :  None.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 236 (21) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | ISOLATION OF SYSTEM  COMPONENTS  
Employ boundary protection mechanisms  to separate [Assignment: organization -defined system 
components ] supporting [Assignment: organization -defined missions  and/or business functions].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations can isolate system components performing different 
missions or business functions. Such isolation limits unauthorized informat ion flows among 
system components and  provides the opportunity to deploy greater levels of protection for 
selected system components. Separating  system components with boundary protection  
mechanisms provides the capability for increased protection of individual components and to 
more effectively control information  flows between those components . This type of enhanced 
protection limits the potential harm from cyber hostile  attacks and errors. The degree of 
separation provided varies  depending upon the mechanisms chosen.  Boundary protection 
mechanisms include, for example, routers , gateways, and firewalls separating system 
components into physically separate networks or subnetworks; cross -domain devices  
separating subnetworks;  virtualization techniques; and en crypting information flows among 
system components using distinct encryption keys.  
Related Controls :  CA-9, SC -3.  
(22) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | SEPARATE SUBNETS FO R CONNECTING TO DIFF ERENT SECURITY DOMAI NS  
Implement separate network addresses (i.e., different su bnets) to connect to systems in different 
security domains.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The decomposition of systems into subnetworks (subnets) helps to 
provide the appropriate level of protection for network connections to different security 
domains containin g information with different security categories or classification levels.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(23) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | DISABLE SENDER FEED BACK ON PROTOCOL VAL IDATION FAILURE  
Disable feedback to senders on protocol format validation failure.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Disabling feedback to senders when there is a failure in protocol 
validation format prevents adversaries from obtaining information which would otherwise be unavailable.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(24) BOUNDARY PROTECTION | PERSONALLY  IDENTIFIABLE IN FORMATION  
For systems that process, store, or transmit personally identifiable information:  
(a) Apply [ Assignment: organization- defined processing rules ] to data elements of personally 
identifiable information;  
(b) Monitor for permitted processing at the external boundary of the system and at key internal 
boundaries within the system;  
(c) Document each processing exception; and  
(d) Review and remove exceptions that are no longer supported.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Managing the transmission of personally identifiable inform ation and 
how such information is used is an important aspe ct of safeguarding an individual’s privacy. 
Processing rules that d etermine how or when personally identifiable information  may be used 
or transmitted ensures that such information  is used or trans mitted only in accordance with 
established privacy requirements.  
Related Controls :  SI-15. 
References :  FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800- 41, 800-77. 
SC-8 TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY AND INTEGRITY  
Control :  Protect the [ Selection  (one or more) : confidentiality; integrity ] of transmitted information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to  internal and external networks  and all types of 
information any system components from which information that can transmit information 
including, for example,  servers, notebook  computers, desktop computers, mobile devices, printers, 
copiers, scanners, facsimile machines )., and radios . Unprotected  communication paths outside the 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 237 physical protection of a controlled boundary are exposed to the possibility of interception and 
modification. Protecting the confidentiality and integrity of organizational information can be 
accomplished by physical means (e.g.,or by logical means. Physical protection can be achieved  by 
employing protected distribution systems ) or by logical means (e.g., . Logical protection can be 
achieved by  employing encryption techniques ).. Organizations relying on commercial providers 
offering  transmission services as commodity services  rather than as fully dedicated services  (i.e., 
services which can be highly specialized to individual customer needs) ,, may find it difficult to 
obtain the necessary assurances regarding the implementation of needed security controls for 
transmission confidentiality and integrity. In such situations, organizations determine what types 
of confidentiality /integrity services are available in standard, commercial telecommunication 
service packages. If  it is infeasible or impractical to obtain the necessary security controls and 
assurances of control effectiveness through appropriate contracting vehicles, organization s can 
implement appropriate compensating security controls or explicitly accept the additional risk.  
Related Controls :  AC-17, AC-18, AU -10, IA -3, IA -8, IA -9, MA -4, PE-4, SA-4, SC -7, SC -16, SC -
20, S C-23, SC -28. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TRANSMISSION CONFIDE NTIALITY AND INTEGRI TY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC OR ALTERNATE PHYSICA L PROTECTION  
The information system implements Implement  cryptographic mechanisms  to [Selection  (one or 
more) : prevent unauthorized disclosure  of information; detect changes to information]  during 
transmission  unless otherwise protected by [ Assignment: organization- defined alternative physical 
safeguards] .. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Encrypting information for transmission protects information  from  
unauthorized disclosure and modification.  Cryptographic mechanisms implemented to protect 
information integrity include, for example, cryptographic hash functions which have common 
application in digital signatures, checksums, and message authentication c odes.  Alternative 
physical security safeguards  include,  for example, protected distribution systems.  Related 
control: SC -13. 
Related Controls :  SC-13. 
(2) TRANSMISSION CONFIDE NTIALITY AND INTEGRI TY | PRE- AND POST -TRANSMISSION HANDLING  
Maintain the [ Selection  (one or more) : confidentiality; integrity ] of information during preparation 
for transmission and during reception.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Information can be either unintentionally or maliciously disclosed or 
modified during  preparation for transmission o r during reception including, for example, 
during aggregation, at protocol transformation points, and during packing  and unpacking. 
These unauthorized disclosures or modifications compromise the confidentiality or integrity 
of the information.  
Related Cont rols:  AU-10. 
(3) TRANSMISSION CONFIDE NTIALITY AND INTEGRI TY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION FOR MESSAGE 
EXTERNALS  
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to protect  message externals unless otherwise protected by 
[Assignment: organization- defined alternative physical safeguards].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses protection against unauthorized 
disclosure of information. Message externals include, for example, message headers  and 
routing information. This control enhancement prevents the exploi tation of message externals 
and applies to internal and external networks or links that may be visible to individuals who are not authorized users. Header  and routing information is sometimes transmitted  in the clear 
(i.e., unencrypted ) because the information is not properly identified by organizations as 
having significant value or because encrypting the information can result in lower network 
performance or higher costs. Alternative physical safeguards  include, for example, protected 
distribution systems . 
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13. 
(4) TRANSMISSION CONFIDE NTIALITY AND INTEGRI TY | CONCEAL OR RANDOMIZE COMMUNICA TIONS  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 238 Implement cryptographic mechanisms to conceal or randomize communication patterns unless 
otherwise protected by [ Assignment: organization- defined alternative physical safeguards] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses protection against unauthorized 
disclosure of information. Communication patterns include, for example, frequency, periods, 
amount, and predictability. Chang es to communications patterns can reveal information 
having intelligence value especially when combined with other available information related 
to the missions and business functions supported by organizational system s. This control 
enhancement prevents t he derivation of intelligence based on communications patterns and 
applies to internal and external networks or links that may be visible to  individuals  who are 
not authorized users. Encrypting the  links and transmitting in continuous , fixed or random 
pattern s prevents the derivation of intelligence from the system  communications patterns. 
Alternative physical safeguards  include, for example, protected distribution systems.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC-13. 
References :  FIPS Publications 140-2, 197; NIST Special Publications 800- 52, 800-77, 800-81, 
800-113, 800-177; NIST Interagency Report 8023 . 
SC-9 TRANSMISSION CONFIDENTIALITY  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -8]. 
SC-10 NETWORK DISCONNECT  
Control :  Terminate the network connection associated with a communications session at the end of 
the session or after [ Assignment: organization- defined time -period] of inactivity.   
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to internal and external networks. Terminating network 
connections associated with specific communications sessions include, for example, de- allocating 
associated TCP/IP address  or port pairs a t the operating  system level  and de-allocating networking 
assignments at the application level if multiple application sessions are using a single  operating 
system-level network connection. P eriod s of inactivity may  be established by organizations and 
include, for example, time -periods by type of network access or for specific network accesses.  
Related Controls :  AC-17, SC -23. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-11 TRUSTED PATH  
Control :  
a. Provide  a [Selection: physically; logically ] isolated t rusted communications path for 
communications between the user and the trusted components of the system; and  
a.b. Permit users to invoke the trusted communications path for communications between the user 
and the following security functions of t he system , incl uding at a minimum, authentication 
and re -authentication : [Assignment: organization -defined security functions  to include at a 
minimum, information system authentication and re -authentication] .].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Trusted paths are mechanisms by whi ch users (through input devices) can 
communicate directly with security functions of systems with the requisite assurance to support 
security policies . These  mechanisms can be activated only by users or the security functions of 
organizational systems. Use r responses via trusted paths are protected from modifications by or 
disclosure to untrusted applications. Organizations employ trusted paths for trustworthy, high-
assurance connections between security functions of systems and users  including, for example , 
during system logons . The original  implementations of trusted path used an out -of-band signal to 
initiate the path , for example  using the <BREAK>  key, which does not transmit characters that can 
be spoofed. In later implementations , a key combination tha t could not be hijacked was used , for 
example, the <CTRL> + <ALT> + <DEL> keys. Note, however, that any such key combinations are 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 239 platform -specific and may not provide a trusted path implementation in every case.  Enforcement 
of trusted communications paths  is typically provided by  a specific implementation that meets  the 
reference monitor concept.  
Related Controls :  AC-16, AC -25, SC-12, SC -23. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TRUSTED PATH | LOGICAL ISOLATION  
(a) Provide a trusted communications path that is  logically isol ated and irrefutably  distinguishable 
from other communications paths ; and  
(b) Initiate the trusted communications path for communications between the following security 
functions of the system and the user [ Assignment: organization- defined security functions].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This enhancement permits the system to initiate a  trusted path which 
necessitates that the user can  unmistakably recognize the source of the communication as a trusted 
system component. For example, the trusted path may appear in an  area of the display that other 
applications cannot access, or be based on the presence of an identifier that cannot be spoofed.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
SC-12 CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT  
Control :  Establish and manage  cryptographic keys for required cryptography employed within the 
system in accordance with [ Assignment: organization -defined requirements for  key generation, 
distribution, storage, access, and destruction] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Cryptographic key manage ment and establishment can be performed using 
manual procedures or automated mechanisms with supporting manual procedures. Organization s 
define  their key management requirements in accordance with applicable laws, Executive Orders, 
directives, regulations,  policies, standards, and guidelines , specifying appropriate options, levels, 
and parameters. Organizations manage trust stores  to ensure that only approved trust anchors are 
in such trust stores . This includes certificates with visibility external to orga nizational systems and 
certificates related to the internal operations of systems.  
Related Controls :  AC-17, AU -9, AU -10, CM -3, IA -3, IA -7, SA -4, SA -9, SC -8, SC -11, SC -13, SC -
17, SC -20, SC -37, SC -40, SI -3, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTA BLISHMENT AND MANAGE MENT | AVAILABILITY  
Maintain availability of information in the event of the loss of cryptographic keys by users.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Escrowing of encryption keys is a common practice for ensuring 
availability in the event of loss of keys. A forgotten passphrase is an example of losing a 
cryptographic key.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANA GEMENT | SYMMETRIC KEYS  
Produce, control, and distribute symmetric cryptographic keys using [ Selection: NIST  FIPS -
compliant;  NSA -approved ] key management technology and processes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANA GEMENT | ASYMMETRIC KEYS  
Produce, control, and distribute asymmetric cryptographic keys using  [Selection: NSA -approved 
key management technology and processes; approved DoD PKI Class 3 certificates; prepositioned 
keying material; approved  DoD PKI Class 3 or Class 4 certificates and hardware security tokens 
that protect the user’s private key; cert ificates issued in accordance with organization -defined 
requirements ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 240 (4) CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLISHMENT AND MANA GEMENT | PKI CERTIFICATES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -12]. 
(5) CRYPTOGRAPHIC KEY ESTABLI SHMENT AND MANAGEMEN T | PKI CERTIFICATES / HARDWARE TOKENS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -12]. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 56A, 800-56B, 800-56C, 800-57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-
3, 95663; NIST Interagency Reports  7956, 7966 . 
SC-13 CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTECTION  
Control :  Implement the following cryptographic uses and type of cryptography for each use:  
[Assignment: organization -defined cryptographic uses  and type of cryptography required for each 
use] in accordance with applic able federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, 
and standards .]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Cryptography can be employed to support a variety of security solutions 
including, for example, the protection of classified information and Co ntrolled Unclassified 
Information ; the provision and implementation of digital signatures; and the enforcement of 
information separation when authorized individuals have the necessary clearances but lack the 
necessary formal access approvals. Cryptography can also be used to support random number 
generation and hash generation. Generally applicable cryptographic standards include FIPS -
validated cryptography and NSA -approved cryptography. This control does not impose  any 
requirements on organizations to use cryptography. However, if cryptography is required due to the selection of other security controls, organizations define each type of cryptographic use and the type of cryptography required (e.g., protection of . For example, organizations that need to 
protect classified information  specify the use of NSA- approved cryptography . Organizations that 
need to  provision and implement digital signatures  specify the use of FIPS- validated 
cryptography.  In all instances, cryptography is implemented in accordance with applicable laws, 
Executive Orders, directives, policies, regulations, standards , and guidelines . 
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC -3, AC -7, AC -17, AC -18, AC -19, AU -9, AU- 10, CM -11, CP -9, IA -3, 
IA-7, MA -4, MP -2, MP -4, MP -5, SA -4, SA -9, SC -8, SC -12, SC -20, SC -23, SC-28, SC -40, SI -3, 
SI-7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
(1) CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTEC TION | FIPS-VALIDATED CRYPTOGRAPHY  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -13]. 
(2) CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTEC TION | NSA-APPROVED CRYPTOGRAPH Y 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -13]. 
(3) CRYPTOGRAPHIC P ROTECTION | INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT  FORMAL ACCESS APPRO VALS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -13]. 
(4) CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTEC TION | DIGITAL SIGNATURES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -13]. 
References :  FIPS Publication 140-2.  
SC-14 PUBLIC ACCESS PROTECTIONS  
[Withdrawn: Capability provided by Incorporated into  AC-2, AC -3, AC -5, AC -6, SI-3, SI-4, SI-5, SI-7, SI-10]. 
SC-15 COLLABORATIVE COMPUTING DEVICES  AND APPLICATIONS  
Control : 
a. Prohibit remote activation of collaborative computing devices  and applications  with the 
following exceptions: [ Assignment: organization -defined exceptions where remote activation 
is to be allowed ]; and  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 241 b. Provide  an explicit indication of use to users physically present at the devices.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Collaborative computing devices and applications include, for example , 
remote meeting devices and applications , networked white boards, cameras, and microphones . 
Explicit indication of use includes, for example, signals to users when collaborative computing 
devices and applications are activated.  
Related Controls :  AC-21. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) COLLABORATIVE COMPUT ING DEVICES | PHYSICAL DISCONNECT   
Provide physical disconnect of collaborative computing devices in a manner that supports ease of 
use. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Failing to physically disconnect from collaborative computing devices 
can result in subsequent compromises of organizational information. Providing easy methods to physically disconnect from such devices a fter a collaborative computing session ensures 
that participants carry out the disconnect activity without having to go through complex and 
tedious procedures.  
Related Controls :  None . 
 
(2) COLLABORATIVE COMPUT ING DEVICES | BLOCKING INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUN ICATIONS TRAFFIC  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -7]. 
(3) COLLABORATIVE COMPUT ING DEVICES | DISABLING AND  REMOVAL IN SECURE W ORK AREAS  
Disable or remove collaborative computing devices and applications from [Assignment: 
organization- defined systems or system  components ] in [Assignment: organization -defined secure 
work areas].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Failing to disable or remove collaborative computing devices and 
applications from systems or system components can result in subsequent compromises of 
organizati onal information including, for example, eavesdropping on conversations.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) COLLABORATIVE COMPUT ING DEVICES | EXPLICITLY INDICATE  CURRENT PARTICIPANT S 
Provide an explicit indication of current participants in [ Assignment: organization -defined online 
meetings and teleconferences].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement helps to prevent unauthorized individuals 
from participating in collaborative computing sessions without the explicit knowledge of 
other participants.  
Related C ontrols :  None . 
References :  None.  
SC-16 TRANSMISSION OF SECURITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES  
Control :  The information system associates Associate  [Assignment: organization -defined security 
and privacy attributes ] with information exchanged between information systems  and between 
system components . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security and privacy attributes can be explicitly or implicitly associated 
with the information contained in organizational information system s or system components . 
Attributes  are an abstracti on representing the basic properties or characteristics of an entity with 
respe ct to safeguarding information or the management of personally identifiable information. 
Attributes are typically associated with internal data structures including, for example , records, 
buffers, files  within the information system . Security and privacy attributes are used to implement 
access control and flow  control policies; reflect special dissemination, management, or distribution 
instructions,  including permitted uses of pe rsonal ly identifiable  information ; or support other 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 242 aspects of the information security and privacy policies . Privacy attributes  may be used 
independently, or in conjunction with security attributes . 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4, AC-16. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) TRANSMISSION OF SECU RITY AND PRIVACY ATTRIBUTES | INTEGRITY VALIDATIO N  
Validate the integrity of transmitted security and privacy attributes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement ensures that the integrity verification of 
transmitted infor matio n includes security and privacy attributes.  
Related Controls :  AU-10, SC-8. 
References :  None.  
SC-17 PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE CERTIFICATES  
Control :  Issue public key certificates under an [ Assignment: organization -defined certificate 
policy ] or obtai n public key certificates from an approved service provider.  
Supplemental Guidance :  For all certificates, organization s manage system trust stores  to en sure only 
approved trust anchors  are in the trust stores. This control addresses  certificates with visibility 
external to organizational  system s and certificates related to the internal operations  of systems , for 
example, application -specific time services.  
Related Controls :  AU-10, IA -5, SC-12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publica tions 800-32, 800-57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-3, 800-63. 
SC-18 MOBILE CODE  
Control : 
a. Define  acceptable and unacceptable mobile code and mobile code technologies;  
b. Establish usage restrictions and implementation guidance for acceptable mobile code and 
mobile code technologies ; and 
c. Authorize, monitor, and control the use of mobile code within the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Decisions regarding the use  of mobile code within organizational systems 
are based on the potential for the code to cause damage to t he systems if used maliciously. Mobile 
code technologies include, for example, Java, JavaScript, ActiveX, Postscript, PDF, Shockwave 
movies, Flash animatio ns, and VBScript. Usage restrictions and implementation guidelines  apply 
to both the selection and use of mobile code installed on servers and mobile code dow nloaded and 
execut ed on individual workstations and devices including, for example, notebook computers and 
smart phones. Mobile code p olicy and procedures address the specific actions taken to prevent the 
development, acquisition, and  introduction of unacc eptable mobile code within organizational 
system s. 
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -12, CM -2, CM -6, SI -3. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MOBILE CODE | IDENTIFY UNACCEPTAB LE CODE AND TAKE CORRECTIVE ACT IONS  
Identify  [Assignment: organization- defined unacceptable mobile code ] and take [ Assignment: 
organization- defined corrective actions] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Corrective actions when unacceptable mobile code is detected include, 
for example, blocking, quaranti ne, or alerting administrators. Blocking  include s, for exampl e, 
preventing transmission of word processing files with embedded macros when such macros 
have been defined to be unacceptable mobile code.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 243 Related Controls :  None . 
(2) MOBILE CODE | ACQUISITION , DEVELOPMENT , AND USE 
Verify  that the acquisition, development, a nd use of mobile code to be deployed in the system 
meets [ Assignment: organization -defined mobile code requirements].  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) MOBILE CODE | PREVENT DOWNLOADING  AND EXECUTION  
Prevent the download and execution  of [Assignment: organization- defined unacceptable mobile 
code ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) MOBILE CODE | PREVENT AUTOMATIC E XECUTION  
Prevent the automatic execution of mobile code in [ Assignment: organization -defined software 
applications ] and enforce [Assignment: organization- defined actions ] prior to executing the code.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Actions enforced  before executing mobile code, include, for example, 
prompting users prior to opening electronic mail attachments.  Preventing automatic execution 
of mobile code  includes, for example, disabling auto execute feature s on system components 
employing  portable storage devices  such as Compact Disks ( CDs), Digital Video Disks 
(DVDs ), and Universal Serial Bus ( USB ) devices.  
Relat ed Controls :  None . 
(5) MOBILE CODE | ALLOW EXECUTION ONL Y IN CONFINED ENVIRO NMENTS  
Allow execution of permitted mobile code only in confined virtual machine environments.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SC-44, SI -7. 
References :  NIST Special  Publication 800-28. 
SC-19 VOICE OVER INTERNET PROTOCOL  
Control : 
a. Establish usage restrictions and implementation guidelines  for Voice over Internet Protocol 
(VoIP) technologies; and  
b. Authorize, monitor, and control the use of VoIP technologies within the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Usage restrictions and implementation guidelines are  based on the potential 
for the VoIP technology to cause damage to the system if used maliciously . 
Related Controls :  CM-6, SC -7, SC -15. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 58. 
SC-20 SECURE NAME/ADDRESS RESO LUTION SERVICE (AUTHORITATIVE SOURCE)  
Control : 
a. Provide additional data origin authentication and integrity verification artifacts along with the 
authoritative name resolution  data the system returns in response to external  name/address 
resolution queries ; and 
b. Provide the means to indicate the security status of child zones and (if the child supports 
secure resolution services) to enable verification of a chain of trust among parent and child 
domains, when operating as part of a distributed, hierarchical nam espace.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 244 Supplemental Guidance :  This control enables external clients  including, for example, remote 
Internet clients, to obtain origin authentication and integrity verification assurances for the 
host/service name to network address resolution information obtained through the service.  
System s that provide name  and address resolution service s include, for example, domain name 
system (DNS) servers. Additional artifacts include, for example, DNS Security (DNSSEC) d igital 
signatures and cryptographic keys . DNS  resource records are examples of authoritative data. The 
means to indicate the security status of child zones  includes, for example,  the use of delegation 
signer resource records in the DNS.  The DNS security controls reflect  (and are referenced from ) 
OMB Memorandum 08- 23. Information Systems that use technologies other than the DNS to map 
between host  and service names and network addresses provide other means to assure the 
authenticity  and integrity of response data.  
Related Controls :  AU-10, SC -8, SC -12, SC-13, SC -21, SC -22. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURE NAME /ADDRESS RESOLUTION S ERVICE (AUTHORITATIVE SOURCE ) | CHILD SUBSPACES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -20]. 
(2) SECURE NAME /ADDRESS RESOLUTION S ERVICE (AUTHORITATIVE SOURCE ) | DATA ORIGIN AND INTEGRITY   
Provide data origin and integrity protection artifacts for internal name/address resolution queries.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publications  140-2, 186-4; NIST Special Publication 800-81. 
SC-21 SECURE NAME/ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERV ICE (RECURSIVE OR CACHING RESOLVER)  
Control :  Request and perform data origin authentication and data integrity verification on the 
name/address resolution responses the system receives from authoritative sources.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Each client of nam e resolution services either performs this validation on 
its own, or has authenticated channels to trusted validation providers.  System s that provide name  
and address resolution service s for local clients  include, for example, recursive resolving or 
cachin g domain name system (DNS) servers. DNS client resolvers either perform validation of 
DNSSEC signatures, or clients use authenticated channels to recursive resolvers that perform such validations. S ystems that use technologies other than the DNS to map bet ween host/service names 
and network addresses provide some other means to enable clients to verify the authenticity and 
integrity of response data.  
Related Controls :  SC-20, SC -22. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
(1) SECURE NAME /ADDRESS RESOLUTION S ERVICE (RECURS IVE OR CACHING RESOL VER) | DATA ORIGIN AND 
INTEGRITY  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -21]. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 81. 
SC-22 ARCHITECTURE AND PROVIS IONING FOR NAME/ADDRESS RESOLUTION SERVICE  
Control :  Ensure the  systems that collectively provide name/address resolution service for an 
organization are fault -tolerant and implement internal and external role separation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  System s that provide na me and address resolution services include, for 
example, domain name system (DNS) servers. To eliminate single points of failure and to enhance 
redundancy, organizations  employ at least two authoritative domain name system s ervers;  one 
config ured as the primary server and the other configured as the secondary  server . Additionally, 
organizations typically deploy the servers in two geographically separated network subnet works  
(i.e., not located in the same physical facility).  For role separation , DNS servers with internal role s 
only process name  and address resolution requests from within  organiza tions (i.e., from internal 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 245 clients). DNS servers with external roles  only process name  and address resolution information 
requests from clients external to organization s (i.e., on external networks including the Internet ). 
Organizations specify  clients that can access authoritative DNS server s in certain role s, for 
example, by address ranges  and explicit lists.  
Related Controls :  SC-2, SC -20, SC -21, SC -24. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 81. 
SC-23 SESSION AUTHENTICITY  
Control :  Protect the authenticity of communications sessions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses  communications protection at the session, versu s 
packet level  (e.g., sessions in service -oriented architectures providing web -based services)  and. 
Such protection  establish es grounds for confidence at both ends of communications session s in the 
ongoing identit ies of other part ies and in the validity of information transmitted. Authenticity 
protection includes, for example, protecting against man-in-the-middle attacks  and session 
hijacking,  and the  insertion of  false information into sessions.  
Related Controls :  AU-10, SC-8, SC -10, SC -11. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SESSION AUTHENTICITY  | INVALIDATE SESSION IDENTIFIERS AT LOGOUT   
Invalidate session identifiers upon user logout or other session termination.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement curtails the ability of adversaries from 
capturing and continuing to employ previously valid session IDs.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) SESSION AUTHENTICITY  | USER -INITIATED LOGOUTS AND MESSAGE DISPLAYS   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -12(1) ]. 
(3) SESSION AUTHENTICITY  | UNIQUE SESSION IDEN TIFIERS WITH RANDOMI ZATION  
Generate a unique session identifier for each session with [ Assignment: organization- defined 
randomness requirements]  and recognize only session identifiers that are system -generated.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement curtails the ability of adversaries from 
reusing previously valid session IDs.  Employing the concept of randomness in the generation 
of unique session identifiers protects  against brute -force attacks to determine future session 
identifiers.  
Related Controls :  AC-10, SC -13. 
(4) SESSION AUTHENTICITY  | UNIQUE SESSION IDEN TIFIERS WITH RANDOMI ZATION   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -23(3) ]. 
(5) SESSION AUTHENTICITY  | ALLOWED CERTIFICATE  AUTHORITIES   
Only allow the use of [Assignment: organization -defined certificate authorities] for verification of 
the establishment of protected sessions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Reliance on certificate authorit ies (CAs)  for the establishment of 
secure session s includes, for example,  the use of S ecure Socket Layer (SSL) and/ or Transport 
Layer Security (TLS) certificates. These certificates, after verification  by their respective 
CAs, facilitate the establishment of protected session s between web client s and web server s. 
Related Controls :  SC-13. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 52, 800-77, 800-95, 800-113. 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 246 SC-24 FAIL IN KNOWN STATE  
Control :   Fail to a [ Assignment: organization -defined known system state ] for [Assignment: 
organization- defined types of system failures ] preserving [ Assignment: organization- defined 
system state information ] in failure . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Failure in a known state addresse s security  concerns  in accordance with the 
mission  and business  needs  of organizations. Failure in a known state helps to prevent the loss of 
confidentiality, integrity, or availability of information in the event of failure s of organizational 
system s or system  component s. Failure in a known safe state helps to prevent systems from failing 
to a state that may cause injury to individuals or destruction to property.  Preserving system state 
information facilitates system restart and return to the operational m ode of organizations  with less 
disruption of mission  and business processes.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP-4, CP-10, CP -12, SC -7, SC -22, SI -13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-25 THIN NODES  
Control :  Employ [Assignment: organization- define d system components ] with minimal 
functionality and information storage.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The deployment of system components with reduced/ minimal functionality 
(e.g., diskless nodes and thin client technologies) reduces the need to secure every user endpoint, 
and may reduce the exposure of information, systems, and s ervices to cyber attacks.  Examples of 
reduced or minimal functionality include, for example, diskless nodes and thin cli ent technologies.  
Related Controls :  SC-30, SC -44. 
Control Enhance ments :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-26 HONEYPOTS  
Control :  Include components within organizational systems specifically designed to be the target of 
malicious attacks for detecting, deflecting, and analyzing such attacks.  
Supplemental Guidance :  A honeypo t is established  as a decoy to attract adversaries and to deflect 
their attacks away from  the operational systems  supporting organizational missions and business 
functions . Depending upon the specific usage of the honeypot , consultation with the Office of the 
General C ounsel  before deployment may be needed . 
Related Controls :  SC-30, SC-35, SC-44, SI -3, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
(1) HONEYPOTS | DETECTION OF MALICI OUS CODE  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -35]. 
References :  None.  
SC-27 PLATFORM -INDEPENDE NT APPLICATIONS  
Control :  Include  within organizational systems:  [Assignment: organization -defined platform -
independent applications ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Platforms are combinations of hardware and software used to run software 
applications. Platforms include operating systems; the underlying computer architectures; or both. 
Platform -independent applications are those applications with the capability to execute  on multiple 
platforms. Such applications promote portability and reconstitution on different platform s. This 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 247 increases  the availability of  critical or essential function s within organizations  in situations where 
systems with specific operating systems are under attack.  
Related Controls :  SC-29. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-28 PROTECTION OF INFORMATION AT REST  
Control :  Protect the [ Selection (one or more): confidentiality; integrity ] of [Assignment: 
organization- defined information]  at rest . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the confidentiality and integrity of in formation at 
rest and covers user information and system information. Information at rest refers to the state of 
information when it is not in process or in transit and is located on storage devices as specific 
components of systems. The focus of this cont rol is not on the type of storage device or frequency 
of access but rather the state of the information. System -related information requiring protection 
includes, for example, configurations or rule sets for firewalls, gateways, intrusion detection and 
prevention systems, filtering routers, and authenticator content. Organizations may employ 
different mechanisms to achieve confidentiality and integrity protections, including the use of 
cryptographic mechanisms and file share scanning. Integrity protection can be achieved, for 
example, by implementing Write -Once -Read -Many (WORM) technologies. When adequate 
protection of information at rest cannot otherwise be achieved, organizations may employ other 
security controls including, for example, frequent scanning to identify malicious code at rest and 
secure off -line storage in lieu of online storage  when adequate protection of information at rest 
cannot otherwise be achieved  and/or continuous monitoring to identify malicious code at rest . . 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -6, AC-19, CA-7, CM -3, CM -5, CM -6, CP-9, MP-4, MP -5, PE-3, SC -
8, SC -13, SC-34, SI-3, SI -7, SI-16. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PROTECTION OF INFORM ATION AT REST | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTE CTION  
Implement cryptographic mechanisms  to prevent unauthorized disclosure  and modification of 
[Assignment: organization- defined information] when at rest on [ Assignment: organization- defined 
system components].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Selection of cryptographic mechanisms  is based on the need to protect  
the confidentiality and integrity of organizational information.  The strength of mechanism is 
commensurate with the security category and/or classification of the information.  This control 
enhancement applies to significant  conce ntrations of digital media in organizational areas 
designated for media storage. It also applies to limited quantities of media generally associated with system components in operational environments including, for example, 
portable storage devices, notebook computers, and mobile devices . Selection of cryp tographic 
mechanisms  is based on the need to protect  the confidentiality and integrity of organizational  
information.  The strength of mechanism is commensurate with the security category or 
classification of the information.  Organizations have the flexibil ity to either encrypt all 
information on storage devices (i.e., full disk encryption) or encrypt specific data structures 
(e.g.,including, for example,  files, records, or fields . Organizations employing cryptographic 
mechanisms to protect information at re st also consider cryptographic key management 
solutions.  
Related Controls :  AC-19, SC -12. 
(2) PROTECTION OF INFORM ATION AT REST | OFF-LINE STORAGE  
Remove the following information from online storage and store off -line in a secure location: 
[Assignment: organi zation -defined information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Removing organizational information from online system storage to 
off-line storage eliminates the possibility of individuals gaining unauthorized access to the 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 248 information through  a network.  Therefore, organization s may choose to move  information to 
off-line storage in lieu of  protecting such information in  online storage . 
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 56A, 800-56B, 800-56C, 800-57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-
3, 800-111, 800-124. 
SC-29 HETEROGENEITY 
 Control:  Employ a diverse set of information technologies for [ Assignment: organization- defined 
system components ] in the implementation of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Increasing the diversity of information technologies within organizational  
system s reduces the impact of potential exploitation s or compromises of specific technolog ies and 
also defends . Such diversity protects  against common mode failures, including those failures 
induced by supply chain att acks. Diversity in information technologies a lso reduces the likelihood 
that the means adversaries use to compromise one system component will be equally effective 
against other system components, thus further increasing the adversary work factor to successfully complete planned attacks. An increase in diversity may add complexity and management overhead 
which could ultimately lead to mistakes and unauthorized configurations.  
Related Controls :  AU -9, PL-8, SA-12, SC -27, SC -30. 
Control Enhancements : 
(2)(1)  HETEROGENEITY | VIRTUALIZATION TECHNIQUES  
Employ vir tualization techniques to support the deployment of a diversity of operating systems 
and applications that are changed [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  While frequent changes to operating systems and applications pose 
configuration management challenges, the changes can result in an increased work factor for 
adversaries to conduct successful attacks. Changing virtual  operating system s or application s, 
as opposed to changing actual operating system s or application s, provi des virtual changes that 
impede attacker success while reducing configuration management effort s. Virtualization 
techniques can assist in isolating untrustworthy software or software of dubious provenance 
into confined execution environments.  
Related Contr ols:  None . 
References :  None.  
SC-30 CONCEALMENT AND MISDIRECTION  
Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined concealment  and misdirection  techniques ] for 
[Assignment: organization -defined systems ] at [Assignment: organization- defined time -periods ] to 
confuse and mislead adversaries . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Concealment  and misdirection  techniques can  significantly reduce the 
targeting capability of adversaries (i.e., window of opportunity and available attack surface) to 
initiate and complete attacks . For example, virtualization techniques provide organizations with 
the ability to disguise systems, potentially reducing the likelihood of successful attacks without the 
cost of having multiple platforms.  Increased use of concealment and misdirection tech niques  and 
methods  including, for example,  randomness , uncertainty , and virtualization,  may sufficiently 
confuse and mislead adversaries and subsequently increase the risk of discovery and/ or exposing 
tradecraft. Concealment and misdirection techniques may also provide organizations additional 
time to successfully perform core missions and business functions. Because of the time and effort 
required to support concealment  and misdirection  techniques , it is anticipated that such techniques 
would be used by or ganizations on a very limited basis.  
Related Controls :  AC-6, SC -25, SC -26, SC -29, SC -44, SI -14. 
Control Enhancements :   
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 249 (1) CONCEALMENT AND MISD IRECTION | VIRTUALIZATION TECHNIQUES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -29(1)].  
(2) CONCEALMENT AND MISD IRECTION | RANDOMNESS  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined techniques ] to introduce randomness into 
organizational operations  and assets.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Randomness introduces increased levels  of uncertainty  for adversaries 
regarding the actions organization s take in defending their systems against attacks . Such 
actions may impede the ability of adversaries to correctly target information resources of 
organizations supporting critical missions or business functions. Uncertainty may also cause adversaries to h esitate before initiating or continuing their attack s. Misdirection techniques 
involving randomness include, for example , performing certain routine actions at different 
times of day, employing different information technologies  (e.g., browsers, search eng ines),, 
using different suppliers , and rotating roles and responsibilities of organizational personnel.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) CONCEALMENT AND MISD IRECTION | CHANGE PROCESSING AND STORAGE LOCATIONS  
Change the location of [ Assignment: organization -define d processing and/or storage ] [Selection:  
[Assignment: organization- defined t ime frequency ]; at random time intervals]].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Adversaries target critical organizational missions  and business 
functions and the information resources systems  supporting those missions and functions 
while at the same time, trying to minimize exposure of their existence and tradecraft. The static, homogeneous, and deterministic nature of organizational systems targeted by 
adversaries, make such systems more susceptible to cyber attacks with less adversary cost and 
effort to be successful. Changing  organizational  processing and storage locations (sometimes 
referred to as moving target defense) addresses the advanced persistent threat (APT) using 
techniques such as virtualization, distributed processing, and replication. This enables 
organizations to relocate the information resources system components  (i.e., processing and/or 
storage) supporting critical missions and business functions. Changing the locations of 
processing activities and/or storage sites introduces  a degree of  uncertainty into the targeting 
activities by adversaries. This uncertainty increases the work factor of adversaries making 
compromises or breaches to organizational systems much more difficult a nd time -consuming. 
It also increases the chances that adversaries may inadvertently disclose aspects of tradecraft 
while attempting to locate critical organizational resources.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) CONCEALMENT AND MISD IRECTION | MISLEADING INFORMAT ION  
Employ realistic, but misleading information in [ Assignment: organization- defined system 
components ] about  its security state or posture.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement mislead s potential adversaries regarding  the 
nature  and extent  of se curity safeguards deployed by organizations. Thus , adversaries may 
employ incorrect and ineffective , attack techniques. One way of misleading adversaries  is for 
organization s to place misleading information regarding the specific security controls 
deployed in external systems that are known to be accessed  or targeted  by adversaries . 
Another technique is the use of deception net s (e.g., honeynets, virtualized environments) that 
mimic actu al aspects of organizational systems but use, for example, out -of-date software 
configurations . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) CONCEALMENT AND MISD IRECTION | CONCEALMENT OF SYST EM COMPONENTS  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined techniques ] to hide or conceal [ Assignment: 
organization- defined system components].  
Supplemental Guidance :  By hiding, disguising, or otherwise concealing critical  information  
system components, organizations may be able to decrease the probability that adversaries 
target and successfully compromise those assets. Potential means for organizations to hid e, 
disguise,  or conceal system components include, for example, configuration of routers or the 
use of honeynets or virtualization techniques.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 250 Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
SC-31 COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS  
Control :  
a. Perform a covert channel anal ysis to identify those aspects of communications within the  
system that are potential avenues for covert [ Selection (one or more): storage; timing] 
channels ; and 
b. Estimate  the maximum bandwidth of those channels.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Developers are in th e best position to identify potential areas  within 
system s that might lead to covert channels. Covert channel analysis is a meaningful activity when 
there is the potential for unauthorized information flows across handling caveats, discretionary 
policies, or security domains, for example, in the case of systems containing export -controlled 
information and having connections to external networks (i.e., networks that are not co ntrolled by 
organizations). Covert channel analysis is also meaningful useful  for multilevel secure systems, 
multiple security  level systems, and cross -domain systems.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -4, SI-11. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) COVERT CHANNEL ANALY SIS | TEST COVERT CHANNEL S FOR EXPLOITABILITY  
Test a subset of the identified covert channel s to determine which channels are exploitable.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) COVERT CHANNEL ANALY SIS | MAXIMUM BANDWIDTH  
Reduce the maximum bandwidth for identified covert [ Selection (one or more); storage; timing ] 
channels to [ Assignment: organization- defined values].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Information system developers are in the best position to reduce the 
maximum bandwidth for identified covert storage and timing channels None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) COVERT CHANNEL ANALY SIS | MEASURE BANDWIDTH I N OPERATIONAL ENVIRO NMENTS  
Measure the bandwidth of [ Assignment: organization- defined subset of identified covert channels ] 
in the operational environment of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses covert  channel bandwidth in 
operational environments versus developmental environments. Measuring covert channel 
bandwidth in specified operational environments helps organizations to determine how much 
information can be covertly leaked before such leakage adve rsely affects missions or business 
functions. Covert channel bandwidth may be significantly different when measured in those 
settings that ar e independent of the specific environments of operation including, for example, 
laboratories or development environments.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
SC-32 SYSTEM PARTITIONING  
 Control :  Partition  the system into [ Assignment: organization- defined system components ] residing 
in separate physical domains or environments  based on [ Assignment: organization- defined 
circumstances  for physical separation of components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  System partitioning is a part of a defense -in-depth protection str ategy. 
Organizations determine the  degree of physical separation of system components from physically 
distinct components in separate racks in the same room, to components in separate rooms for the 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 251 more  critical components, to significant geographical separation  of the most critical components . 
Security categorization can guide the selection of appropriate candidates for domain partitioning.  
Managed interfaces restrict or prohibit network access and information flow  among partitioned 
system components.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, AC-6, SA-8, SC -2, SC -3, SC -7, SC-36. 
Control Enhancements :  None . 
References :  FIPS Publication 199. 
SC-33 TRANSMISSION PREPARATION INTEGRITY  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SC -8]. 
SC-34 NON -MODIFIABLE EXECUTABLE PROGRAMS  
 Control :  At [Assignment: organization- defined  system components ]: 
a. Load and execute the operating envi ronment from hardware -enforced, read -only media; and  
b. Load and execute [ Assignment: organization -defined  applications ] from hardware- enforced, 
read-only media.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The operating environment  for a system contains the specific code that 
hosts applications , for example , operating system s, executives, or monitors including virtual 
machine monitors (i.e., hypervisors). It can also include certain application s running directly on 
hardware platforms. Hardware- enforced, read -only media include, for example , Compact Disk -
Recordable (CD-R) and Digital Video Disk -Recordable (DVD- R) disk drives  and one -time 
programmable read -only memory. The use  of non -modifiable storage ensures the integrity of 
software from the point of creation of the read -only image . The use of reprogrammable read -only 
memory can be accepted as read -only media provided integrity can be adequately protected from 
the point of initial writing to the insertion of the memory into t he system; and there are reliable 
hardware protections against reprogramming the memory while installed in organizational 
system s. 
Related Controls :  AC-3, SI -7, SI -14. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) NON-MODIFIABLE EXECUTABL E PROGRAMS | NO WRITABLE STORAGE   
Employ [Assignment: organization- defined system components ] with no writeable storage that is 
persistent across c omponent restart or power on/off.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement eliminates the possibility of malicious code 
insertion via persi stent, writeable storage within the designated system compone nts. It applies 
to fixed and removable storage, with the latter being addressed either directly or as specific restriction s imposed through access controls for mobile devices.  
Related Controls :  AC-19, MP -7. 
(2) NON-MODIFIABLE EXECUTABL E PROGRAMS | INTEGRITY PROTECTION ON READ -ONLY MEDIA  
Protect the integrity of information prior to storage on read- only media and control the media after 
such information has been recorded onto the media . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security safeguards prevent  the substitution of media into systems or 
the reprogramming of programmable read -only media  prior to installation  into the systems. 
Such safeguards include , for example,  a combination of prev ention, detection, and res ponse.  
Related Controls :  CM-3, CM -5, CM -9, MP -2, MP -4, MP -5, SC -28, SI -3. 
(3) NON-MODIFIABLE EXECUTABL E PROGRAMS | HARDWARE -BASED PROTECTION  
(a) Employ hardware -based, write- protect for [Assignment: organization- defined system firmware 
components ]; and  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 252 (b) Implement specific procedures for [ Assignment: organization -defined authorized individuals ] 
to manually disable hardware write- protect for firmware modifications and re -enable the write-
protect prior to returning to operational mode.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None . 
SC-35 HONEYCLIENTS  
Control :  Include system components that proactively seek to identify network -based malicious 
code, malicious websites, or web -based malicious code.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Honeyclients differ fr om honeypots in that the components actively probe 
networks including, the Internet , in search of malicious code (e.g., worms) contained on external 
websites. Like honeypots, honeyclients require some supporting isolation measures  (e.g., 
virtualization)  to ensure that any malicious code discovered during the search and subsequently 
executed does not infect organizational systems. Virtualization is a common technique for 
achieving such isolation . 
Related Controls :  SC-26, SC -44, SI -3, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-36 DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING AND STORAGE  
Control :  Distribute [ Assignment: organization- defined processing and storage  components ] across 
multiple physical locations.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Distributing processing and storage across multiple physical locations 
provides some degree of redundancy or overlap for organizations, and therefore increases the work 
factor of adversaries to adversely impact organizational operations, assets, and individuals. This 
control does not assum e a single primary processing or storage location, and therefore,  allows for 
parallel processing and storage.  
Related Controls :  CP-6, CP -7, PL-8, SC -32. 
 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DISTRIBUTED PROCESSI NG AND STORAGE | POLLING TECHNIQUES  
(a) Employ polling techniques to identify potential faults, errors, or compromises to [ Assignment: 
organization- defined distributed processing and storage components ]; and 
(b) Take [ Assignment: organization -defined  action ] in response to identified faults, errors, or 
compromises.  
Supple mental Guidance :  Distributed processing and/or storage may be employed to reduce 
opportunit ies for adversaries  to successfully compromise the confidentiality, integrity , or 
availability  of information  and systems . However, distribution of processing and/or storage 
components does not prevent adversaries  from compromising one (or more) of the distributed 
components. Polling compares the processing results and/or storage content from  the various 
distributed  components and subsequently voting on the outcomes.  Polling  identif ies potential 
faults, errors, or compromises in distributed processing and storage components.  Polling 
techniques may also be applied to processing and storage components that are not physically 
distributed . 
Related Controls :  SI-4. 
References :  None.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 253 SC-37 OUT -OF-BAND CHANNELS  
Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined out-of-band channels ] for the physical 
delivery or  electronic  transmission of [ Assignment: organization- defined information, system 
components, or devices ] to [ Assign ment: organization- defined individuals  or systems].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Out -of-band channels  include, for example, local  nonnetwork access es to 
systems; network path s physically separate from network path s used for operational traffic ; or 
nonelectronic  paths such as the US Posta l Service . This is in contrast with using  the same channel s 
(i.e., in -band channels) that carry  routine operational traffic.  Out-of-band channels do not have the 
same vulnerability or exposure as in -band channels , and therefore,  the confidentiality, integrity , or 
availability compromises of in -band channel s will not compromise or adversely affect the out-of-
band chann els. Organizations may employ out- of-band channels in the delivery or transmission of 
many organizational items inc luding, for example, identifiers  and authenticators ; cryptographic 
key management  information ; configuration management changes  for hardware, firmware, or 
software; security updates ; system and data backups; maintenance information;  and malicious 
code prot ection updates.   
Related Controls :  AC-2, CM -3, CM -5, CM -7, IA-2, IA-4, IA -5, MA -4, SC -12, SI -3, SI -4, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) OUT-OF-BAND CHANNELS | ENSURE DELIVERY AND TRANSMISSION  
Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards] to ens ure that only [Assignment: 
organization- defined individuals or systems] receive the [ Assignment: organization -defined 
information, system components, or devices].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Techniques employed by organizations to ensure that only designated 
systems or ind ividuals receive particular certain  information, system components, or devices 
include, for example, sending authenticators via  an approved courier service but requiring 
recipients to show some form of government -issued photographic identificat ion as a condition 
of receipt.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 57-1, 800-57-2, 800-57-3. 
SC-38 OPERATIONS SECURITY  
Control :  Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined operations security safeguards ] to protect key 
organizational information throughout the system development life cycle.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Operations security (OPSEC) is a systematic process by which potential 
adversaries can be denied information about the capabilities and intenti ons of organizations by 
identifying, controlling, and protecting generally unclassified information that specifically relates 
to the planning and execution of sensitive organizational activities. The OPSEC process involves 
five steps: identification of critical information  (e.g., the security categorization process ; analysis 
of threats; analysis of vulnerabilities; assessment of risks; and  the application of appropriate 
countermeasures. OPSEC safeguards  are applied to organizational systems and the environm ents 
in which those systems operate. OPSEC safeguards protect the confidentiality of key information 
including, for example, limiting the sharing of information with suppliers and potential suppliers 
of system components , information technology products  and services, and with other non -
organizational elements and individuals.  Information critical to organizational mission  and 
business success includes, for example, user identities, element uses, suppliers, supply chain 
processes, functional and security req uirements, system design specifications, testing and 
evaluation protocols, and security control implementation details.  
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA -7, PL -1, PM -9, PM -12, RA -2, RA -3, RA -5, SA -12, SC -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 254 SC-39 PROCESS ISOLATION   
Control :  Maintain a separate execution domain for each executing process with the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Systems can maintain separate execution domains for each executing 
process by assigning each process a separate address space.  Each system process has a distinct 
address space so that communi cation between processes is  performed in a manner controlled 
through the security function s, and one p rocess cannot modify the executing code  of another 
process . Maintaining separate execu tion domains for executi ng processes can be achieved, for 
example, by implementing separate address spaces. This capability is readily available in most 
commercial operating systems that employ multi -state processor technolog ies. 
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC-4, AC-6, AC-25, SA -8, SC-2, SC-3. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PROCESS ISOLATION | HARDWARE SEPARATION   
Implement hardware separation mechanisms to facilitate process separation . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Hardware- based separation of system processes is generally  less 
susceptible to compromise than software -based separation, thus providing greater assurance 
that the separation will be enforced. Hardware separation mechanisms include, for example, 
hardware memory management.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) PROCESS ISOLATI ON | THREAD ISOLATION  
Maintain a separate execution domain for each thread in [ Assignment: organization -defined multi -
threaded processing ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
SC-40 WIRELESS LINK PROTECTION   
Control :  Protect external and internal [ Assignment: organization- defined wireless links ] from  
[Assignment: organization -defined types of signal parameter attacks or references to sources for  
such attacks ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to internal a nd external wireless communication links 
that may be visible to individuals  who are no t authorized system users. Adversaries can exploit the 
signal parameters of wireless links if such links are not adequately protected. There are many ways 
to exploit the signal parameters of wireless links to gain intelligence, deny s ervice, or spoof users 
of organizational system s. This control reduces the impact of attacks that are unique to wireless 
systems. If organizations rely on commercial service provider s for tran smission services as 
commodity item s rather than as  fully dedicated services , it may not be poss ible to implement this 
control . 
Related Controls :  AC-18, SC-5. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) WIRELESS LINK PROTEC TION | ELECTROMAGNETIC INT ERFERENCE  
Implement cryptographic mechanisms that ach ieve [ Assignment: organization- defined level of 
protection] against the effects of intentional electromagnetic interference.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement protects against intentional jamming that 
might deny or impair communications by ensuring that wireless spread spectrum waveforms 
used to provide anti -jam protection are not predictable  by unauthorized individuals. The 
control enhancement may also coincidentally help to mitigate the effects of unintentional 
jamming due to interference from legitimate transmitt ers sharing the same spectrum. M ission 
requirements, p rojected threats, concept of operations , and applicable legislation, directives, 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 255 regulations, policies , standards, and guidelines determine l evels of wi reless link availability  
and performance/ cryptography  needed.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13. 
(2) WIRELESS LINK PROTEC TION | REDUCE DETECTION PO TENTIAL  
Implement  cryptographic mechanisms to reduce the detection potential of  wireless links to 
[Assignment: organization -defined level of reduction ].   
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement is needed for covert communications and 
protecting wireless transmitters from being geo -located by their transmissions. The control 
enhancement ensures that spread sp ectrum waveforms used to achieve low probability of 
detection are not predictable by unauthorized individuals. M ission requirements, p rojected 
threats, concept of operations , and applicable legislation, directives, regulations, policies , 
standards, and gui delines determine t he levels to which wireless links should  be undetectable.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13. 
(3) WIRELESS LINK PROTEC TION | IMITATIVE OR MANIPU LATIVE COMMUNICATION S DECEPTION  
Implement  cryptographic mechanisms to identify and reject wireless transmissions that are 
deliberate attempts to achieve imitative or manipulative communications deception based on 
signal parameters.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement ensures that the signal parameters of 
wireless transmissions are not pred ictable by unauthorized individuals. Such unpredictability 
reduces the probability of imitative or manipulative communications deception based  upon 
signal parameters alone.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13, SI -4. 
(4) WIRELESS LINK PROTEC TION | SIGNAL PARAMETER IDENTIFICATION  
Imple ment  cryptographic mechanisms to prevent the identification of  [Assignment: organization -
defined wireless transmitters] by using the transmitter  signal parameters.   
Supplemental Guidance :  Radio fingerprinting techniques identify the unique signal parameters 
of transmitter s to fingerprint such transmitters  for purposes of tracking and mission/user 
identification.  This control enhancement protects against the unique identification of wireless 
transmitter s for purposes of intelligence exp loitation by ensuring that anti -fingerprinting 
alterations to signal parameters are not predictable by unauthorized individuals . This control 
enhancement helps assure mission success when anonymity is required.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13. 
References :  None.  
SC-41 PORT AND I/O DEVICE ACCESS  
Control :   physically disables [Selection: Physically  or removes Logically ] disable or remove  
[Assignment: organization -defined connection ports or input/output devices ] on [ Assignment: 
organization- defined systems or system components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Connection ports include, for example, Universal Serial Bus (USB) and 
Firewire (IEEE 1394). Input/output (I/O) devices include, for example, Compact Disk (CD) and 
Digital Video Disk (DVD) drives. Physically Disabling or removing such connection ports and 
I/O devices helps prevent exfiltration of information from system s and the introduction of 
malicious code  into system s from those ports  or devices . Physically disabling or removing ports 
and/or devices is the stro nger action . 
Related Controls :  AC-20, MP -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SC-42 SENSOR CAPABILITY AND DATA 
Control : 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 256 a. Prohibit the remote activation of environmental sensing capabilities on organizational 
systems or system components with the following exceptions: [ Assignment: organization-
defined exceptions where remote activation  of sensors is allowed]; and  
b. Provide an explicit indication of sensor use to [ Assignment: organization- defined class of 
users].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This contr ol often applies to types of systems or system components 
characterized as mobile devices, for example, smart phones, tablets, and E -readers. These systems 
often include sensors that can collect and record data regarding the enviro nment where the system 
is in use. Sensors that are embedded within mobile devices include, for example, cameras, 
microphones, Global Positioning System (GPS) mechanisms, and accelerometers. While the sensors on mobiles devices provide an important function, if activated covertly , such devices  can 
potentially provide a means for adversaries to learn valuable information  about individuals and 
organizations . For example, remotely activating the GPS function on a mobile d evice could 
provide an adversary  with t he ability to track the sp ecific movements  of an individual.  
Related Controls :  None . 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SENSOR CAPABILITY AN D DATA | REPORTING TO AUTHOR IZED INDIVIDUALS OR ROLES  
Verify  that the system is configured so that data or information collected by the [Assignment: 
organization -defined sensors]  is only reported to authorized individuals or roles . 
Supplemental Guidance :  In situations where sensors are  activated by authorized individuals , it is 
still possible that the data or information collected by the sensors will be se nt to unauthorized 
entities . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) SENSOR CAPABILITY AN D DATA | AUTHORIZED USE  
Employ [Assignment: organization- defined measures] so that data or inf ormation collected by 
[Assignment: organization- defined sensors]  is only used  for authorized purpose s. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Information collected by sensors for a specific authorized purpose 
could be misused for some unauthorized purpose. For example, GPS sensors that are used to 
support traffic navigatio n could be misused to track moveme nts of individuals.  Measures to  
mitigate such activities include, for example,  additional training to ensure that authorized 
individuals  do not abuse their authority;  and in the case where sensor data or information is 
maintained by external parties , contr actual restrictions on the use of such data/ information.  
Related Controls :  PA-2. 
(3) SENSOR CAPABILITY AN D DATA | PROHIBIT USE OF DEV ICES  
Prohibit the use of devices possessing [ Assignment: organization- defined environmental sensing 
capabilities]  in [Assignm ent: organization- defined facilities, areas, or systems].  
Supplemental Guidance :  For example, organizations may prohibit individuals from bringing cell 
phones or digital cameras into certain designated facilities or controlled areas within facilities 
wher e classified information is stored or sensitive conversations are taking place.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) SENSOR CAPABILITY AN D DATA | NOTICE OF COLLECTION  
Employ th e following measures to facilitate an individual’s awareness that personally identifiable 
information is being collected by [ Assignment: organization- defined sensors ]: [Assignment: 
organization- defined measures].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Awareness that organizational sensors are collecting data enable 
individuals to more effectively engage in mana ging their privacy. Measures can include , for 
example,  conventional written notices and sensor configurations that make individuals aware 
directly or indirectly through other devices that the sensor is collecting information. Usability 
and efficacy of the notice are important considerations.  
Related Controls :  IP-1, IP -2, IP -4. 
(5) SENSOR CAPABILITY AN D DATA | COLLECTION MINIMIZAT ION 
CHA PTER THREE   PAGE 257 Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined sensors] that are configured to minimize the collection 
of information about individuals  that is not needed.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Although policies to control for authorized use can be applied to 
information once it is collected, minimizing the collection of information that is not needed 
mitigates privacy -related  risk at the system entry point and mitigates the risk of policy control 
failures. Sensor configurations include , for example,  the obscuring of human features such as 
blurring or pixelating flesh tones.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 124. 
SC-43 USAGE RESTRICTIONS 
Control : 
a. Establish usage restrictions and implementation guidelines  for [Assignment: organization-
defined system com ponents ] based on the potential  to cause damage to the information system 
if used maliciously;] ; and 
b. Authorize, monitor, and control the use of such components within the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control applies to all system components include hardware, software, 
or firmwar eincluding wired and wireless peripheral  components  (e.g., Voice Over Internet 
Protocol, mobile code, digital , for example,  copiers, printers, scanners, optical devices, wireless  
and other similar technologies . Usage restrictions and implementation guidelines are based on the 
potential for the system components to cause damage to the system if used maliciously . Usage 
restrictions for other technologies such as VoIP, mobile code, mobile devices , and wireless are 
addressed in SC -19, SC -18, AC -19, and AC -18. 
Related Controls :  AC-18, AC -19, CM -6, SC -7, SC -18, SC -19. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 124. 
SC-44 DETONATION CHAMBERS  
Contr ol:  Employ a detonation chamber capability within [ Assignment: organization -defined 
system, system component, or location].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Detonation chambers, also known as dynamic execution environments, 
allow organizations  to open email attach ments, execute untrusted or suspicious applications, and 
execute Universal Resource Locator requests in the safety of an isolate d environment or a 
virtualized sandbox. These protected and isolated execution environments provide a means of 
determining whether the associated attachments  or applications contain malicious code . While 
related to the concept of deception nets,  this control is not intended to maintain a long- term 
environment in which adversaries can operate and their actions can be observed. Rather , it is 
intended to qu ickly identify malicious code and reduce the likelihood  that the code is propagated 
to user environments of operation or prevent such propagation completely.  
Related Controls :  SC-7, SC -25, SC -26, SC -30, SC -35, SI -3, SI -7. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 177. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 258 3.20   SYSTEM AND INFORM ATION INTEGRITY  
Quick link to System and Inform ation Integrity summary table  
SI-1 SYSTEM AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY POLICY AND PROCEDURES  
Control : 
a. Develop, document, and disseminate to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ]: 
1. A system and information integrity policy that:  
(a) Addresses purpose, scope, roles, responsibilities, management commitment, 
coordination among organizational entities, and compliance; and  
(b) Is consistent with applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, 
standards, and guidelines; and  
2. Procedures to  facilitate the imple mentation of the system and information integrity policy 
and the associated system and information integrity  controls;  
b. Designate an [ Assignment: organization- defined  senior management official ] to manage the 
system and information inte grity policy and procedures;  
b.c. Review and update the current  system and information integrity:  
1. Policy [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency]; and 
2. Procedures [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] ; 
d. Ensure that the system and information i ntegrity procedures implement the system and 
information integrity policy and controls; and  
e. Develop, document, and implement  remediation actions  for violations of the system and 
information integrity policy . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control addresses the establ ishment of policy and procedures for the 
effective implementation of selected  security the controls and control enhancements in the SI 
family. The risk management strategy is an important factor in establishing policy and procedures  
reflect applicable federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, regulations, policies, standards, . 
Comprehensive policy  and guidance. procedures help provide security and privacy assurance.  
Security  and privacy  program policies and procedures at the organization level may make the need 
for system -specific policies and procedures unnecessary. The policy can be included as part of the 
general information security and privacy policy for organization s or conversely,  can be 
represented by multiple policies reflectin g the complex nature of certain organizations. The 
proced ures can be established for security program in general and privacy programs  and for 
particular information systems, if needed.  Procedures describe how policies or controls are 
implemented and can be directed at the perso nnel or role that is the object of the procedure. 
Procedures can be documented in system security and privacy plans or in one or more separate 
documents. It is important to recognize that restating controls does not constitute an  organizational 
risk manage ment strategy is a key factor in establishing policy  and procedures . policy or 
procedure.  
Related Controls :  PM-9, PS-8, SI -12. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 12, 800-100. 
SI-2 FLAW REMEDIATION  
 Control : 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 259 a. Identif y, report, and correct system flaws;  
b. Test software and firmware updates rel ated to flaw remediation for effectivenes s and potential 
side effects before installation; 
c. Install security -relevant software and firmware updates within [ Assignment: organization-
defined time -period] of the release of the updates; and  
d. Incorporate flaw rem ediation into the organizational configuration management process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organization s identif y systems affected by software flaws including 
potential vulnerabilities resulting from those flaws , and report this information to designated 
organizational personnel  with information security and privacy responsibilities.  Security- relevant 
software updates  include, for example,  patches, service packs, hot fixes , and anti -virus signatures. 
Organizations also address f laws discovered during securi ty assessment s, continuous monitoring, 
incident response activities, and  system error handling.  Organizations  take advantage of  available 
resources such as the Common Weakness Enumeration (CWE) or Common Vulnerabilities and 
Exposures (CVE) databases  in rem ediating flaws discovered in organizational information  
systems.  By incorporating flaw remediation into ongoing configuration management process es, 
required /anticipated  remediation act ions can be tracked and verified. F law remediation actions that 
can be t racked and verified include, for example, determining whether organizations follow US-
CERT guidance and Information Assurance Vulnerability Alerts.  Organization -defined time-
periods for updating security -relevant software and firmware may vary based on a v ariety of 
factors including, for example, the security category of the system or the criticality of the update 
(i.e., severity of the vulnerability related to the discovered flaw). Some types of flaw remediation 
may require more testing than other types. O rganizations determine the degree and type of testing 
needed for the specific type of flaw remediation activity under consideration and  the types of 
changes that are to be configuration -managed. In some situations, organizations may determine 
that testing of software or firmware updates is not necessary or practical, for example, when 
implementing simple anti -virus signature updates. Organizations also consider in testing decisions, 
whether security -relevant software or firmware updates are obtained from au thorized sources with 
appropriate digital signatures.  
Related Controls :  CA-4, CM-3, CM-4, CM -5, CM -6, CM -8, MA-2, RA -5, SA-10, SA-11, SI-3, SI -
5, SI -7, SI-11. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) FLAW REMEDIATION | CENTRAL MANAGEMENT  
Centrally manage the flaw remediati on process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Central management is t he organization- wide management and 
implementation of flaw remediation processes. Central management includes planning, 
implementing, assessing, authorizing, and monitoring the organization -defined , centrall y 
managed flaw remediation controls . 
Related Controls :  PL-9. 
(2) FLAW REMEDIATION | AUTOMATED FLAW REMEDIATION STATUS   
Employ automated mechanisms [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ] to determine  the 
state of system components with regard t o flaw remediation.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SI-4. 
(3) FLAW REMEDIATION | TIME TO REMEDIATE F LAWS AND BENCHMARKS FOR CORRECTIVE ACTIONS  
(a) Measure the time between flaw identification and flaw remediation ; and  
(b) Establish [ Assignment: organi zation -defined benchmarks] for taking corrective actions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement requires organizations to determine the time 
it takes on the average to correct system flaws after such flaws have been identified, and 
subsequently establish organizational benchmarks (i.e., time frames) for taking corrective 
actions. Benchmarks can be established by the type of flaw or the severity of the potential 
vulnerability if the flaw can be exploited.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 260 Related Controls :  None . 
(4) FLAW REMEDIATION | AUTOMATED PATCH MAN AGEMENT TOOLS   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -2]. 
(5) FLAW REMEDIATION | AUTOMATIC SOFTWARE AND FIRMWARE UPDATES   
Install [Assignment: organization -defined security -relevant software and firmware updates ] 
automatically to [ Assignment: or ganization- defined system components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Due to system integrity and availability concerns, organizations 
consider  the methodology used to carry out automatic updates . Organizations balance the 
need to ensure that the updates are inst alled as soon as possible with the need to maintain  
configuration management and control with any mission or operational impact s that automatic 
updates might impose . 
Related Controls :  None . 
(6) FLAW REMEDIATION | REMOVAL OF PREVIOUS VERSIONS OF SOFTWAR E AND FIRMWARE  
Remove previous versions of [ Assignment: organization- defined software and firmware  
components ] after updated versions have been installed.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Previous versions of software or firmware components that are not 
removed from the s ystem after updates have been installed may be exploited by adversaries. 
Some  information technology  products may remove previous versions of software and 
firmware automatically from the system.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(7) FLAW REMEDIATION | PERSONALLY IDENTI FIABLE INFORMATION  
(a) Identify and correct flaws related to the collection, usage, processing, or dissemination of 
personally identifiable information;  
(b) Report flaws related to personally identifiable information to the Senior Agency Official for 
Privacy;  
(c) Receive approval for correction of privacy -related flaws from the Senior Agency Official for 
Privacy;  
(d) Prior to installation, assess software and firmware updates related to flaw remediation  for 
effectiveness and consistency with terms agreed upon in the privacy impact assessment;  
(e) Install privacy -relevant so ftware and firmware updates within  [Assignment: organization-
defined time -period] of the release of the updates; and  
(f) Incorporate flaw remediation of personally identifiable information into the organizational 
configuration management process.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  IR-4, IR -5, PM -23. 
References :  FIPS Publications  140-2, 186-4; NIST Special Publication s 800-40, 800-128; NIST 
Interagency Report 7788 . 
SI-3 MALICIOUS CODE PROTECTION  
 Control : 
a. Employs Implement  [Selection (one or more):  signature based; non- signature based]  
malicious code protection mechanisms at information system entry and exit points to detect 
and eradicate malicious code;  
b. Automatically update malicious code protection mechanisms whenever new releases are 
available in accordance with organizational configuration management pol icy and procedures;  
c. Configure malicious code protection mechanisms to:  
1. Perform periodic scans of the system [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] and 
real-time scans of files from external sources at [ Selection (one or more); endpoint; 
network entry /exit points ] as the files are downloaded, opened, or executed in accordance 
with organizational security policy; and  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 261 2. [Selection (one or more): block malicious code; quarantine malicious code; send alert to 
administrator; [Assignment: organization- defined action ]] in response to malicious code 
detection; and 
d. Address the receipt of false positives during malicious code detection and eradication and the 
resulting potential impact on the availability of the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  System entry and exit  points include, for example, firewalls, remote -access 
servers , workstations, electronic mail servers, web servers, proxy servers, remote -access servers , 
workstations , notebook computers, and mobile devices . Malicious code includes, for example, 
viruses, w orms, Trojan horses, and spyware.  Malicious code can also be encoded in various 
formats (e.g., UUENCODE, Unicode) , contained within compressed or hidden files, or hidden in 
files using techniques such as steganography. Malicious code can be transported by different 
means inserted into systems in a variety of ways  including, for example, web accesses, by 
electronic mail, electronic mail attachments the world -wide  web, and portable storage devices. 
Malicious code insertions occur through the exploitation of information system vulnerabilities.  
Malicious code protection mechanisms include, for example, anti -virus signature definitions  and 
reputation -based technologies . A variety of technologies and methods exist to limit or eliminate 
the effects of malicious code.  Malicious code protection mechanisms include, for example, 
signature - and nonsignature -based technologies. Nonsignature -based  detection mechanisms 
include, for example, artificial intelligence techniques that use  heuristics to detect, analyze, and 
describ e the characteristics or behavior of malicious code and to provide safeguards  against such 
code  for which signature s do not yet exist or for which existing si gnatures may not be effective. 
This includes polymorphic malicious code (i.e., code that changes s ignatures when it replicates). 
Nonsignature -based mechanisms also include reputation -based technologies.  In addition to the 
above technologies, p ervasive configuration management , comprehensive  software integrity 
controls , and anti -exploitation software  may be effective in preventing execution of unauthorized 
code. In addition to Malicious code may be present in commercial off -the-shelf software , 
malicious code may also be present  and in custom -built software. This could include , for example, 
logic bombs, back doors, and other types of cyber attacks that could affect organizational mi ssions 
and business functions.  
In situations where  malicious code protection mechanisms cannot always detect such code. In 
these situations be detected by detection methods and t echnologies , organizations rely instead on 
other  types of  safeguards  includ ing, for example, secure coding practices, configuration 
management and control, trusted procurement processes, and monitoring practices to help ensure 
that software does not perfor m functions other than the functions  intended.  Organizations  may 
determine that in response to the detection of malicious code, different action s may be  warrant ed. 
For example, organizations can define actions in response to malicious code detection during  
periodic scans, actions in response to detection of malicious downloads, or actions in response to 
detection of maliciousness when attempting to open or execute files.  Due to system integrity and 
availability concerns, organizations consider  the specific methodology used to carry out automatic 
updates.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, AC -19, CM-3, CM -8, IR -4, MA -3, MA -4, RA -5, SC -7, SC -26, SC -28, SC -
23, SC -44, SI -2, SI-4, SI -7, SI-8, SI -15. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | CENTRAL MANAGEMENT  
Centrally manage malicious code  protection mechanisms.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Central management is t he organization- wide management and 
implementation of malicious code protection mechanisms . Central management includes 
planning, implementing, assessing, aut horizing, and monitoring the organization- defined, 
centrall y managed flaw and malicious code protection security controls . 
Related Controls :  PL-9. 
(2) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | AUTOMATIC UPDATES  
The information system automatically updates malicious code protection mechanisms.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 262 Supplemental Guidance :  Malicious code protection mechanisms include, for example, signature 
definitions.  Due to information system integrity and availability concerns, organizations give 
careful consideration to the methodology used to carry out automatic updates.  Related control: 
SI-8. 
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -3]. 
(3) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | NON-PRIVILEGED USERS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -6 (10)].  
(4) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | UPDATES ONLY BY PRI VILEGED USERS  
Update mal icious code protection mechanisms only when directed by a privileged user.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement may be appropriate for is employed in  
situations where for r easons of security or operational continuity , updates to malicious code 
protection mechanisms are only applied when selected/ approved by designated organizational 
personnel.   
Related Controls :  CM-5. 
(5) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | PORTABLE STORAGE DEVICES  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into MP -7]. 
(6) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | TESTING AND VERIFICATION  
(a) Test malicious code protection mechanisms [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] by 
introducing a known benign, non -spreading test case into the system ; and  
(b) Verify that the detection of the test case and the associated incident report ing occur.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  CA-2, CA -7, RA -5. 
(7) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | NONSIGNATURE -BASED DETECTION  
The information system implements  nonsignature -based malicious code detection mechanisms.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Nonsig nature -based  detection mechanisms include, for example, the 
use of heuristics to detect, analyze, and describe the characteristics or behavior of malicious 
code and to provide safeguards  against malicious code  for which signature s do not yet exist or 
for w hich existing si gnatures may not be effective. [Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -3]. 
(8) This includes polymorphic malicious code (i.e., code that changes signatures when it 
replicates). This control enhancement does not preclude the use of signature -based detection 
mechanisms.  
(9)(8)  MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | DETECT UNAUTHORIZED COMMANDS  
Detect [ Assignment: organization -defined unauthorized operating system commands ] through the 
kernel application programming interface at [ Assignment: organization- defined system hardware 
components ] and [ Selection (one or more): issue a warning;  audit  the command execution;  prevent 
the execution of the command ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement can also be applied to critical interfaces 
other than kernel -based interf aces, including for example, interfaces with virtual machines 
and privileged applications. Unauthorized operating system commands include, for example, 
commands for kernel functions from system processes that are not trusted to initiate such 
commands, or c ommands for kernel functions that are suspicious even though commands of 
that type are reasonable for processes to initiate. Organizations can define the malicious 
commands to be detected by a combination of command types, command classes, or specific 
instances of commands. Organizations can define hardware components by specific 
component  type, component  type, , component  location in the network, or combination 
therein. Organizations may select different actions for different types /, classes/specific , or 
instances of potentially malicious commands.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU-6, AU -12. 
(10)(9) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | AUTHENTICATE REMOTE  COMMANDS  
Implement  [Assignment: organization -defined security safeguards] to authenticate [ Assignment: 
organization- defined rem ote commands ]. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 263 Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement protects against unauthorized commands 
and replay of authorized commands. This capability  is important for those remote systems 
whose loss, malfunction, misdirection , or exploitation would hav e immediate and/or serious 
consequences  (e.g., , including, for example, injury or death, property damage, loss of high -
valued value  assets, compromise of classified  or sensitive controlled unclassified  information, 
or failure of important mission s or busine ss functions . Authentication safeguards  for remote 
commands help to ensure that information systems accept and execute commands  in the order 
intended, execute only authorized commands , and thatreject  unauthorized commands  are 
rejected. . Cryptographic mecha nisms can be employed, for example, to authenticate remote 
commands.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC -13, SC -23. 
(11)(10) MALICIOUS CODE PROTE CTION | MALICIOUS CODE ANAL YSIS 
(a) Employ [ Assignment: organization- defined tools and techniques ] to analyze the 
characteristics and behavior of malicious code; and  
(b) Incorporate the results from malicious code analysis into organizational incident response 
and flaw remediation processes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The application use of selected malicious code analysis tools  and 
technique s provides organizations with a  more in -depth  understanding of  adversary tradecraft 
(i.e., tactics, techniques, and procedures) and the functionality and purpose of specific 
instances of malicious code . Understanding the characteristics of malicious code f acilitates 
more effective organizational responses  to current and future threats. Organizations can also 
conduct malicious code  analys es by using reverse engineering techniques or  by monitoring 
the behavior of executing code.  
Related Controls :  None . 
Refer ences :  NIST Special Publication 800- 83, 800-125B , 800-177. 
SI-4 SYSTEM MONITORING  
Control : 
a. Monitor the system  to detect:  
1. Attacks and indicators of potential attacks in accordance with [ Assignment: organization-
defined monitoring objectives ]; and 
2. Unauthorized local, network, and remote connections;  
b. Identify unauthorized use of the system through [ Assignment : organization- defined 
techniques and methods ]; 
c. Deploys Invoke internal monitoring capabilities or deploy  monitoring devices:  
1. Strategicall y within the system to collect organization -determined essential information; 
and 
2. At ad hoc locations within the system to track specific types of transactions of interest to 
the organization;  
d. Protect information obtained from intrusion- monitoring tools  from unauthorized acc ess, 
modification, and deletion;  
e. Heightens Adjust  the level of system monitoring activity when there is an indication of 
increased a change in risk to organizational operations and assets, individuals, other 
organizations, or the Nation  based on law enforcement information, intelligence information, 
or other credible sources of information ; 
f. Obtain legal opinion regarding  system monitoring activities  in accordance with applicable 
federal laws, Executive Orders, directives, policies, or regulations ; and  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 264 g. Provide [ Assignment: organization- defined system monitoring information] to [ Assignment: 
organization- defined personnel or roles ] [Selection (one or more): as needed;  [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Sys tem monitoring includes external and internal monitoring. External 
monitoring includes the observation of events occurring at system boundary (i.e., part of perimeter 
defense and boundary protection). boundaries.  Internal monitoring includes the observation  of 
events occurring within the information system. Organizations monitor systems, for example, by 
observing audit activities in real time or by observing other system aspects such as access patterns, 
characteristics of access, and other actions. The monit oring objectives may guide and inform the 
determination of the events. System monitoring capability is achieved through a variety of tools 
and techniques , including, for example,  intrusion detection systems, intrusion prevention systems, 
malicious code pro tection software, scanning tools, audit record monitoring software, network 
monitoring software). and networ k monitoring software. The distribution and configuration of 
monitoring devices can impact throughput at key internal and external boundaries, and at  other 
locations across a network due to the introductio n of network throughput latency. Therefore, such 
devices  are strategically located  and deployed as part of an established organization -wide security 
architecture.  Strategic locations for monitoring de vices include, for example, selected perimeter 
locations and near key servers and server farms support ing critical applications. M onitoring 
devices are typically employed at the managed interfaces associated with controls SC -7 and AC -
17. Einstein network m onitoring device s from the Department of Homeland Security can also  be 
included as  monitoring device s. The granularity of  monitoring The information collected is based 
ona function of the  organizational monitoring objectives and the capability of systems to  support 
such objectives. Specific types of transactions of interest include, for example, Hyper Text 
Transfer Protocol (HTTP) traffic that bypasses HTTP proxies. S ystem monito ring is an integral 
part of organizational continuous monitoring  and incident re sponse program s. Output from system 
monitoring serves as input to continuous monitoring  and incident response  program s. A network  
connection is any connection with a device that communica tes through a network (e.g., local  area 
network, Internet).  A remote connection is any connection with a device communicating through 
an external  network (e.g., the Internet).  Local, network, and remote connections can be either 
wired or wireless. Related controls: AC-3, AC-4, AC -8, AC -17, AU -2, AU -6, AU-7, AU-9, AU-
12, CA-7, IR -4, PE-3, RA-5, SC-7, SC-26, SC -35, SI-3, SI -7 and output from system monitoring 
serves as input to those program s. Adjustments to  levels of system monitoring are based on law 
enforcement information, intelligence information, or other credible source s of information. The 
legality of system monitoring activities is based on applicable laws, Executive Orders, directives, 
regulations, policies, standards, and guidelines . 
Related Controls :  AC-2, AC-3, AC-4, AC -8, AC -17, AU -2, AU- 6, AU- 7, AU-9, AU-12, AU-14, 
CA-7, CM-3, CM -8, CM -11, IA -10, IR-4, PE- 3, PM-12, PM-24, RA-5, SA-18, SC-7, SC-26, SC -
31, SC -35, SC -36, SC -37, SI-3, SI-6, SI-7. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM -WIDE INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM  
Connect and configure individual intrusi on dete ction tools into a system -wide intrusion detection 
system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  CM -6. 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOLS AND MECHANISMS FOR REAL -TIME ANALYSIS  
Employ automated tools and mechanisms to support near real -time analysis of events.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Automated tools and mechanisms include, for example, host -based, 
network -based, transport -based, or storage -based event monitoring tools and mechanisms or 
Security Information and Event Management technologies  that provide real time analysis of 
alerts and notifications generated by organizational systems.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED TOOL AND MECHANISM INTEGRATION  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 265 Employ automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection t ools and mechanisms 
into access control and flow control mechanisms  for. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Using  automated tools and mechanisms to integrate intrusion detection 
tools and  mechanisms into access and flow control mecha nisms facilitates a  rapid response  to 
attacks by enabling reconfiguration of these mechanisms in support of attack isolation and 
eliminatio n. 
INFORMATION Related Controls :  None.  
(4) SYSTEM MONITORING | INBOUND AND OUTBOUND COMMUNICATIONS TRA FFIC 
Monitor inbound and outbound communications tra ffic [Assignment: organization -defined 
frequency] for unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Unusual or unauthorized activities or conditions related to system 
inbound and outbound communications traffic include, for exam ple, internal traffic that 
indicates the presence of malicious code within organizational systems or propagating among 
system components; the unauthorized exporting of information; or signaling to external 
systems. Evidence of malicious code is used to ide ntify potentially compromised systems or 
system components.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) SYSTEM MONITORING | SYSTEM -GENERATED ALERTS  
Alert [ Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or roles ] when the following  system -generated  
indications of compromise or potential compromise occur: [ Assignment: organization- defined 
compromise indicators].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Alerts may be generated from a variety of sources, including, for 
example, audit records or inputs from malicious code protection mechanisms, intrus ion 
detection or prevention mechanisms, or boundary protection devices such as firewalls, 
gateways, and routers. Alerts can  be automated or they may be transmitted, for example, 
telephonically, by electronic mail messages, or by text messaging. Organizatio nal personnel 
on the alert notification list can include, for example, system administrators, mission or 
business owners, system owners, system security officers, or privacy officers.  This control 
enhancement focuses on the security alert s generated by the  system. Alternatively, alerts 
generated by organizations in SI -4(12) focus  on information sources external to the system 
such as suspicious activity reports and reports on potential insider threats.  
Related Controls :  AU-4, AU-5, PE- 6. 
(6) SYSTEM MONITORING | RESTRICT NON -PRIVILEGED USERS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into AC -6(10)].  
(7) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO SUSPICIOUS EVENTS  
Notify [ Assignment: organization- defined incident response personnel (identified by name and/or 
by role) ] of detected suspic ious events and take [ Assignment: organization- defined least -
disruptive actions to terminate suspicious events].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Least -disruptive actions include, for example, initiating requests for 
human responses.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(8) SYSTEM  MONITORING | PROTECTION OF MONIT ORING INFORMATION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -4]. 
(9) SYSTEM MONITORING | TESTING OF MONITORING TOOLS  AND MECHANISMS  
Test intrusion -monitoring tools and mechanisms [Assignment: organization -defined frequency].  
Supplemental  Guidance :  Testing intrusion -monitoring tools and mechanism is necessary to 
ensure that the tools and mechanisms are operating correctly and continue to meet satisfy  the 
monitoring objectives of organizations. The frequency of testing depends on the types of tools 
and mechanisms used by organizations and the methods of deployment.  
Related Controls :  CP-9. 
(10) SYSTEM MONITORING | VISIBILITY OF ENCRY PTED COMMUNICATIONS  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 266 Make provisions so that [ Assignment: organization -defined encrypted communications traffic] is 
visible to [ Assignment: organization- defined system monitoring tools  and mechanisms].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations balance the potentially conflicting needs for encrypting 
communications traffic and having visibility into such traffic from a monitoring perspective. 
For some organizations, the need to ensure the confidentiality of communications traffic is 
paramount; for others other organizations , mission  assurance is of greater concern. 
Organizations determine whether the visibility requirement app lies to internal encrypted 
traffic, encrypted traffic intended for external destinations, or a subset of the traffic types.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(11) SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE COMMUNICATI ONS TRAFFIC ANOMALIE S 
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the  external boundary of the system and selected 
[Assignment: organization- defined interior points within the system  (e.g., subnetworks, 
subsystems) ]] to discover anomalies.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Examples of o rganization -defined interior points within the s ystem 
include subnetworks and subsystems . Anomalies within organizational systems include, for 
example, large file transfers; long -time persistent connections; unusual protocols and ports in 
use; and attempted communications with suspected malicious extern al addresses.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(12) SYSTEM MONITORING | AUTOMATED ALERTS  ORGANIZATION GENERATED ALERTS  
Employ automated mechanisms to alert security [Assignment: organization- defined personnel or 
roles ] when  the following organization- generated indicatio ns of inappropriate or unusual activities 
with security or privacy implications  occur : [Assignment: organization- defined activities that 
trigger alerts].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational personnel on the alert notification list can include, for 
examp le, system administrators, mission or business owners, system owners, system security 
officers, or privacy officers.  This control enhancement focuses on the security alerts generated 
by organizations and transmitted using automated means. In contrast  to the alerts generated by 
information systems in SI -4(5) that focus on information sources that are internal to the 
systems such as audit records, the sources of information for this enhancement focus on other 
entities such as suspicious activity reports and r eports on potential insider threats.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(12)(13) SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND EVENT PATTERNS  
(a) Analyze communications traffic and event patterns for the system;  
(b) Develop profiles representing common traffic and event patterns  and/or ev ents; and 
(c) Use the traffic and event profiles in tuning system -monitoring devices to reduce the number of 
false positives and false negatives.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(13)(14) SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS INTRUSION DETECTION  
Employ a w ireless intrusion detection system to identify rogue wireless devices and to detect 
attack attempts and potential compromises or breaches to the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Wireless signals may radiate beyond organization -controlled facilities. 
Organiz ations proactively search for unauthorized wireless  connections including the conduct 
of thorough scans for unauthorized wireless access points. Scans are not limited to those areas within facilities containing system s, but also include areas outside of fa cilities to verify that 
unauthorized wireless access points ar e not connected to organizational systems.  
Related Controls :  AC-18, IA -3. 
(14)(15) SYSTEM MONITORING | WIRELESS TO WIRELIN E COMMUNICATIONS  
Employ an intrusion detection system to monitor wireless commun ications traffic as the traffic 
passes from wireless to wireline networks.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC-18. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 267 (15)(16) SYSTEM MONITORING | CORRELATE MONITORIN G INFORMATION  
Correlate information from monitoring tools and mechanisms employed throughout the system.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Correlating information from different system monitoring tools  and 
mechanisms  can provide a more comprehensive view of information system activity. 
Correlating system monitoring tools and mechanisms  that usuallyty pically  work in isolation 
(e.g.,including, for example, anti -virus software , host monitoring, and network monitoring, 
anti-virus software) can provide an organization -wide monitoring view and may reveal 
otherwise unseen attack pattern s. Understand ing capab ilities and limitations of diverse 
monitoring tools and mechanisms and how to maximize the utility of information generated 
by those tools and mechanisms can help organizations to build develop , operate, and maintain 
effective monitoring programs.  
Related C ontrols :  AU-6. 
(16)(17) SYSTEM MONITORING | INTEGRATED SITUATIO NAL AWARENESS  
Correlate information from monitoring physical, cyber, and supply chain activities to achieve 
integrated, organization- wide situational awareness.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement correlates monitoring information from a 
more diverse set of information sources to achieve integrated situational awareness. Integrated 
situational awareness from a combination of physical, cyber, and supply chain monitoring 
activities enhances t he capability of organizations to more quickly detect sophisticated attacks 
and investigate the methods and techniques employed to carry out such attacks.  In contrast to  
SI-4(16)  which correlates the various cyber monitoring information, this control enhan cement  
correlates monitoring beyond the cyber domain. Such monitoring may help reveal attacks on 
organization s that are operating across multiple attack vectors.  
Related Controls :  AU-16, PE -6, SA -12. 
(17)(18) SYSTEM MONITORING | ANALYZE TRAFFIC AND COVERT EXFILTRA TION 
Analyze outbound communications traffic at the external boundary or perimeter of the system and 
at [Assignment: organization- defined interior points within the system (e.g., subsystems, 
subnetworks) ]] to detect covert exfiltration of information.  
Suppl emental Guidance :  Examples of organization -defined interior points within the system 
include subnetworks and subsystems. Covert means that can be used for the unauthorized 
exfiltration of organizational information include, for example, steganography.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(18)(19) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDIVIDUALS POSING GREATER RISK  
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined additional monitoring] of individuals who have been 
identified by [ Assignment: organization- defined sources ] as posing an increased level of risk.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Indications of increased risk from individuals can be obtained from a 
variety of sources including, for example, human resource records, intelligence agencies, law 
enforcement organizations, and other credible sources. The monitoring of specific individuals 
is closely coordinated with management, legal, security, privacy and human resources resource 
officials within organizations conducting such monitoring  and complies . Monitoring is 
conducted in accordance with federal legis lation applicable laws , Executive Orders, policies , 
directives, regulations, policies,  standards , and guidelines.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(19)(20) SYSTEM MONITORING | PRIVILEGED USERS  
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined additional monitoring] of privileged users.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AC-18. 
(20)(21) SYSTEM MONITORING | PROBATIONARY PERIOD S 
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined additional monitoring] of individuals during 
[Assignment: organization- defined probationary period].  
Supplem ental Guidance :  None.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 268 Related Controls :  AC-18. 
(21)(22) SYSTEM MONITORING | UNAUTHORIZED NETWORK SERVICES  
Detect network services that have not been authorized or approved by [ Assignment: organization-
defined authorization or approval processes ] and [ Selection (o ne or more): audit; alert  
[Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Unauthorized or unapproved network services include, for example, 
services in service -oriented architectures that lack organizational verification or validation 
and therefore may be unreliable or serve as malicious rogues for valid services.  
Related Controls :  CM-7. 
(22)(23) SYSTEM MONITORING | HOST -BASED DEVICES  
Implement [ Assignment: organization -defined host -based monitoring mechanisms ] at 
[Assignment: organi zation -defined system components].  
Supplemental Guidance :  System components where host -based monitoring can be implemented 
include, for example, servers, workstations notebook computers , and mobile devices. 
Organizations may consider employing host -based m onitoring mechanisms from multiple 
information technology product developers  or vendors . 
Related Controls :  AC-18, AC -19. 
(23)(24) SYSTEM MONITORING | INDICATORS OF COMPROMISE  
Discover, collect, and distribute to [ Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or roles ], 
indicators of compromise.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Indicators of compromise (IOC) are forensic artifacts from intrusions 
that are identified on organizational systems at the host or network level. IOCs provide 
organizations with valuable information on o bjects or information systems that have been 
compromised. IOCs for the discovery of compromised hosts can include,  for example, the 
creation of registry key values. IOCs for network traffic include, for example, Universal Resource Locator or protocol eleme nts that indicate malware malicious code  command and 
control servers. The rapid distribution and adoption of IOCs can improve information security 
by reducing the time that systems and organizations are vulnerable to the same exploit or 
attack. Related Contr ols:  AC -18. 
(25) SYSTEM MONITORING | PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION MONI TORING  
Employ automated mechanisms to monitor:  
(a) For unauthorized access or usage of personally identifiable information; and  
(b) The collection, creation, accuracy, relevance, timeliness, impact, and completeness of 
personally identifiable information.  
Supplemental Guidance : Monitoring the collection, creation, accuracy, relevance, timeliness, 
impact, and completeness of personally identifiable information helps improve data quality. 
Automa ted monitoring techniques can create unintended privacy risks  because a utomated 
controls may connect to  external or otherwise unrelated sys tems. The  matching of records 
between these systems may create linkages with unintended consequences. Organizations 
assess and document these risks in their privacy impact assessment and make determinations 
that are in alignment with their privacy program plan . 
Related Controls :  PM-24, PM-26, SI-19. 
References :  NIST Special Publications 800- 61, 800-83, 800-92, 800-94, 800-137. 
SI-5 SECURITY ALERTS, ADVISORIES, AND DIRECTIV ES 
 Control : 
a. Receive system security alerts, advisories, and directives from [ Assignment: organization-
defined external organizations ] on an ongoing basis;  
b. Generate internal security alerts, advisories, and directives as deemed necessary;  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 269 c. Disseminate secur ity alerts, advisories, and directives to : [Selection (one or more):  
[Assignment: organization -defined personnel  or roles ]; [Assignment: organization- defined 
elements within the organization]; [ Assignment: organization- defined external  
organizations ]]; and 
d. Implement security directives in accordance with established time frames , or notif y the 
issuing organization of the degree of noncompliance.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US -CERT) 
generates security alerts an d advisories to maintain situational awareness across the federal 
government. Security directives are issued by OMB or other designated organization s with the 
responsibility and authority to issue such directives. Compliance to security directives is essen tial 
due to the critical nature of many of these directives and the pot ential immediate adverse effects  
on organizational operations and assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation should the 
directives not be implemented in a timely manner.  External organizations include, for example, 
external mission or business partners, supply chain partners, external service providers, and other 
peer or supporting organizations.   
Related Controls :  PM-15, RA -5, SI -2. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY ALERTS , ADVISORIES , AND DIRECTIVES | AUTOMATED ALERTS AN D ADVISORIES  
Employ automated mechanisms to make security alert and advisory information available 
throughout the organization.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The significant number of changes to organizational sys tems and the 
environments in which those systems operate requires the dissemination of security- related 
information to a variety of organizational entities that have a direct interest in the success of organizational missions and business functions. Based on information provided by security 
alerts and advisories, changes may be required at one or more of the three tiers related to the 
management of information security and privacy risk including the governance level, mission 
and business process /enterprise architecture level, and the system level.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 40. 
SI-6 SECURITY AND PRIVACY FUNCTION VERIFICATION  
 Cont rol: 
a. Verify the correct operation of [ Assignment: organization- defined security and privacy 
functions ]; 
b. Perform this verification [ Selection (one or more): [ Assignment: organization- defined system 
transitional states ]; upon command by user with appropriate  privilege; [Assignment: 
organization- defined frequency ]]; 
c. Notify [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ] of failed security and privacy 
verification tests; and  
d. [Selection (one or more): S hut the system down; R estart the system ; [Assignment: 
organization- defined alternative action(s) ]] when anomalies are discovered.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Transitional states  for systems  include, for example, system startup, restart, 
shutdown, and abort. N otification s by the system include, for example, hardwa re indicator lights, 
electronic alert s to system administrator s, and messages to local  computer console s, and/or 
hardware indication s such . In contrast to securit y function verification, privacy function 
verification ensures  that privacy functions operate  as lights . expected and are approved by the 
Senior Agency Official for P rivacy , or that privacy attributes are applied or used as expected.  
Related Controls :  CA-7, CM-4, CM-6, SI-7. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 270 Control Enhancements : 
(1) SECURITY AND PRIVACY FUNCTION VERIFICATIO N | NOTIFI CATION OF FAILED SEC URITY TESTS  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -6]. 
(2) SECURITY  AND PRIVACY  FUNCTION VERIFICATIO N | AUTOMATION SUPPORT FOR DISTRIBUTED TEST ING  
Implement automated mechanisms to  support the management of distributed security and privacy 
func tion testing.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  SI-2. 
(3) SECURITY AND PRIVACY FUNCTION VERIFICATIO N | REPORT VERIFICATION  RESULTS  
Report the result s of security and privacy function verification to [ Assignment: organization -
defined personnel o r roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizational personnel  with potential interest in the results of the 
verification of security and privacy function include, for example, senior information security 
officers  system security managers , systems security off icers , Senior Agency Information 
Security Officers, and Senior Agency Officials for Privacy . 
Related Controls :  SA-12, SI -4. 
References :  None.  
SI-7 SOFTWARE, FIRMWARE, AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY  
 Control :  Employ integrity verification tools to detect unau thorized changes to [ Assignment: 
organization- defined software, firmware, and information].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Unauthorized changes to software, firmware, and information can occur 
due to errors or malicious activity  (e.g., tampering). . Software inclu des, for example, operating 
systems (with key internal components such as kernels, drivers), middleware, and applications. 
Firmware includes, for example, the Basic Input Output System (BIOS).  Information includes 
personally identifiable information and metadata containing security and privacy attributes 
associated with information.  Integrity- checking mechanisms including, for example, parity checks, 
cyclical redundancy checks, cryptographic hashes, and associated tools can automatically monitor 
the integrity of systems and hosted applications.  
Related Controls :  AC-4, CM -3, CM -7, CM -8, MA -3, MA -4, RA -5, SA -9, SA -10, SA -18, SA -19, 
CM-7, SA -12, SC -8, SC -13, SC -28, SC -37, SI -3. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | INTEGRITY CHE CKS  
Perform an integrity check of [ Assignment: organization- defined software, firmware, and 
information] [ Selection (one or more):  at startup; at [Assignment: organization- defined transitional 
states or security- relevant events]; [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Security -relevant events include, for example, the identification of a 
new threat to which organizational systems are susceptible, and the installation of new 
hardware, software, or firmware. Transitional states include, for example, system startup, 
restart, shutdown, and abort . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(2) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | AUTOMATED NOTIFICAT IONS OF INTEGRITY 
VIOLATIONS   
Employ automated tools that provide notification to [ Assignment:  organization- defined personnel  
or roles ] upon discovering discrepancies during integrity verification.  
Supplemental Guidance :  The use of automated tools to report integrity violations and to notify 
organizational personnel in a timely matter is an essent ial precursor to effective risk response. 
Personnel having an interest in integrity violations include, for example, mission and business owners, system owners, systems administrators, software developers, systems integrators, and 
information security officers , and privacy officers.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 271 Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | CENTRALLY -MANAGED INTEGRITY TO OLS  
Employ centrally managed integrity verification tools.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  AU-3, SI -2, SI -8. 
(4) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | TAMPER -EVIDENT PACKAGING   
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SA -12]. 
(5) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | AUTOMATED RESPONSE TO INTEGRITY VIOLATIONS   
Automatically [Selection (one or more): shut the s ystem down; restart the system; implement 
[Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards]] when integrity violations are discovered.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations may define different integrity checking response s by 
type of information, by s pecific information, or a combination of both. Examples of types of 
information include firmware, software, and user data. Examples of specific information 
include  boot firmware for certain  types of machines ; or a combination of both.  . The 
automatic imple mentation of specific safeguards within organizational systems includes, for 
example, reversing the changes, halting the system, or triggering audit alerts when unauthorized modifications to critical security files occur.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(6) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | CRYPTOGRAPHIC PROTE CTION   
Implement  cryptographic mechanisms to detect unauthorized changes to software, firmware, and 
information.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Cryptographic mechanism s used for the protection of integrity  include, 
for example, digital signatures and the computation and application of signed hash es using 
asymmetric cryptography ; protecting the confidentiality of the key used to generate the hash ; 
and using the public key to verify the hash information.  
Related Controls :  SC-12, SC-13. 
(7) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | INTEGRATION OF DETE CTION AND RESPONSE   
Incorporate the detection of the following unauthorized changes into the organizational incident 
response capability: [ Assignment: organizat ion-defined security- relevant changes to the system ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement helps to ensure that detected events are 
tracked, monitored, corrected, and available for historical purposes. Maintaining historical 
records is important both for being able to identify and discern adversary actions over an 
extended time-period and for possible legal actions. Security -relevant changes include, for 
example, unauthorized changes to established configuration settings or unauthorized elevatio n 
of system privileges.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -6, IR -4, IR -5, SI -4. 
(8) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | AUDITING CAPABILITY  FOR SIGNIFICANT EVE NTS  
Upon detection of a potential integrity violation, provide the capability to audit the event and 
initiate the following actions: [ Selection (one or more): generate an audit record; alert current user; 
alert [Assignment: organization- defined personnel or roles ]; [Assignment: organization -defined 
other actions ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizati ons select response actions based on types of software, 
specific software, or information for which there are potential integrity violations.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU -6, AU -12. 
(9) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | VERIFY BOOT PROCESS   
Verify the integrity of the boot process of [ Assignment: organization -defined devicessystem 
components ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Ensuring the integrity of boot process es is critical to starting 
devices system components  in known, trustworthy state s. Integrity  verification mechanisms 
provide organizational personnel witha level of  assurance that only trusted code is executed 
during boot process es. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 272 Related Controls :  SI-6. 
(10) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | PROTECTION OF BOOT FIRMWARE   
Implement [ Assignm ent: organization- defined security safeguards] to protect the  integrity of  boot 
firmware in [Assignment:  organization- defined devicessystem components].  
Supplemental Guidance :  Unauthorized modifications  to boot firmware may be indicative of a 
sophisticate d, targeted  cyber attack. These types of cyber targeted  attacks can result in  a 
permanent denial of service ( e.g., if the firmware is corrupted) or a persistent malicious code 
presence (e.g.,. These situations can occur, for example, if the firmwar e is corr upted or  if the 
malicious code is embedded within the firmware).  Devices . System components  can protect 
the integrity of boot firmware in organizational systems by verifying the integrity and 
authenticity of all updates to the firmware prior to applying ch anges to the boot devices system 
component ; and preventing unauthorized processes from modifying the boot firmware.  
Related Controls :  SI-6. 
(11) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | CONFINED ENVIRONMENTS WITH LIMITED 
PRIVILEGES  
Require that [ Assignm ent: organization- defined user -installed software]  execute in a confined 
physical or virtual machine environment with limited privileges.   
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations identify software that may be of concern regarding  its 
origin or potential for  containing malicious code. For this type of software, user installations 
occur in confined environments of operation to limit or contain damage from malicious code 
that may be executed.  
Related Controls :  CM-11, SC -44. 
(12) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INTEGRITY | INTEGRITY VERIFICAT ION  
Require that the integrity of [ Assignment: organization -defined user -installed software] be verified 
prior to execution.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations verify the integrity of user -installed software prior to 
execution to reduce the likelihood of executing malicious code or code that contains errors 
from unauthorized modifications. Organizations consider the practicality of approaches to 
verifying software integrity including, for example, availability of checksum s of adequate 
trustworthiness from software developers or vendors . 
Related Controls :  CM-11. 
(13) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | CODE EXECUTION IN P ROTECTED ENVIRONMENT S  
Allow execution of binary or machine -executable code obtained from sources  with limited or no 
warranty and without the provision of source  code only in confined physical or virtual machine 
environment s and with the explicit approval of [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or 
roles ].] when such code is:  
(a) Obtained from sourc es with limited or no warranty; and/or  
(b) Without the provision of source code . 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to all sources of binary or machine-
executable code including, for example, commercial software and firmware and open sour ce 
software.  
Related Controls :  CM-10, SC -44. 
(14) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | BINARY OR MACHINE E XECUTABLE CODE  
(a) Prohibit the use of binary or machine -executable code from  sources with limited or no 
warranty and without the provision of sour ce code; and  
(b) Provide exceptions to the source code requirement only for compelling mission  or operational 
requirements and with the approval of the authorizing official.  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies to all sources of binary or m achine -
executable code including, for example, commercial software and firmware and open source software. Organizations assess s oftware products without accompanying source code from 
sources with limited or no warranty for potential security impacts . The a ssessment s address 
the fact that these types of software products may be difficult  to review, repair, or extend, 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 273 given that organization s, in most cases, do not have access to the original source code. In 
addition,  there may be  no owner s who could make suc h repairs on behalf of organizations . 
Related Controls :  SA-5. 
(15) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | CODE AUTHENTICATION  
Implement cryptographic mechanisms to authenticate [ Assignment: organization -defined software 
or firmware  components ] prior to installation . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Cryptographic authentication includes, for example, verifying that 
software or firmware components have been digitally signed using certificates recognized and 
approved by organizations. Code signing is an effective method to protect against malicious 
code.  
Related Controls :  CM-5. 
(16) SOFTWARE , FIRMWARE , AND INFORMATION INT EGRITY | TIME LIMIT ON PROCE SS EXECUTION WITHOUT  
SUPERVISION  
Prohibit  processes from executing  without supervision for more than [ Assignment: organiz ation -
defined time -period].  
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement addresses processes for which  typical or  
normal execution period s can be determined and situations in which organizations exceed 
such periods . Supervision includes, for example, t imers on operating system s, automated 
response s, or manual oversight and response  when system process anomalies occur.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  FIPS Publications 140-2, 180-4, 186-4, 202; NIST Special Publications 800-70, 800-
147. 
SI-8 SPAM PROTECTION    
 Control : 
a. Employ spam pr otection mechanisms at system entry and exit points to detect and act  on 
unsolicited messages; and  
b. Update spam protection mechanisms when new releases are available in accordance with 
organizational configuration management policy and procedures . 
Supplemental Guidance :  System entry and exit points include, for example, firewalls, remote -access 
servers , electronic mail servers, web servers, proxy servers, workstations, notebook /laptop  
computers , and mobile devices . Spam can be transported by different means  including, for 
example, electronic mail, electronic mail attachments, and web accesses. Spam protection mechanisms include, for example, signature definitions.  
Related Controls :  SC-5, SC -7, SC -38, SI -3, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) SPAM PROTECTION | CENTRAL MANAGEMENT   
Centrally manage spam protection mechanisms.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Central management is t he organization- wide management and 
implementation of spam protection mechanisms . Central management includes planning, 
implementing, assessing, auth orizing, and monitoring the organization -defined, centrall y 
managed spam protection controls . 
Related Controls :  AU-3, CM -6, SI -2, SI -7. 
(2) SPAM PROTECTION | AUTOMATIC UPDATES  
Automatically update spam protection mechanisms.  
Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) SPAM PROTECTION | CONTINUOUS LEARNING  CAPABILITY  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 274 Implement  spam protection  mechanisms with a learning capability  to more effectively identify 
legitimate communications traffic.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Learning mechanisms include, for  example, Bayesian filters that 
respond to user inputs identifying specific traffic as spam or legitimate by updating algorithm 
parameters and thereby more accurately separating types of traffic.  
Related Controls :  None.  
References :  NIST Special Publication s 800-45, 800-177. 
SI-9 INFORMATION INPUT RESTRICTIONS  
[Withdr awn: In corporated into AC -2, AC -3, AC -5, AC -6]. 
SI-10 INFORMATION INPUT VALIDATION  
Control :  Check the validity of [ Assignment: organization -defined information inputs ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Checking the valid syntax and semantics of system inputs including, f or 
example, character set, length, numerical range, and acceptable values , verifies that inputs match 
specified definitions for format and content. Software  applications typically follow well -defined 
protocols that use  structured messages (i.e., commands o r queries) to communicate between  
software modules or system  compone nts. S tructured messages can contain raw or unstructured 
data interspersed with metadata or control information.  If software application s use  attacker -
supplied inputs to construct structur ed message s witho ut properly encoding such messages , then 
the attacker could inse rt malicious commands or special characters that can cause the data to be 
interpreted as control information or metadata. Consequently, the module or component that 
receives t he corrupted output will perform the wrong operations or otherwise interpret the data 
incorrectly . Prescreening inputs prior to passing to interpreters prevent s the content f rom being 
unintentionally interpreted as commands.  Input validation ensures accura te and correct inputs and 
prevent attacks such as cross -site scripting and a variety of injection attacks . 
Related Controls :  None.  
Control Enhancements : 
(1) INFORMATION INPUT VA LIDATION | MANUAL OVERRIDE CAPABILITY  
(a) Provide a manual override capability for input validation of  [Assignment: organization -defined 
inputs ]; 
(b) Restrict the use of the manual override capability  to only [Assignment: organization- defined 
authorized individuals ]; and 
(c) Audit the use of the manual override capability.  
Supplemental Guidance :  In certain situations, for example, during events that are defined in 
organizational contingency plans,  a manual overrid e capability for input validation may be 
needed. Such manual overrides are used only in limited circumstances  and with the inputs 
defined  by the organization.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AU-2, AU -12. 
(2) INFORMATION INPUT VA LIDATION | REVIEW / RESOLUTION OF AND RESOLVE  ERRORS  
Review and resolve input validation errors within [ Assignment: organization -defined time -period ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Resolution of input validation errors includes , for example, correcting 
systemic causes  of errors  and resubmitting transactions with corrected input . 
Related Controls :  None.  
(3) INFORMATION INPUT VA LIDATION | PREDICTABLE BEHAVIO R  
Verify that the  system behaves in a predictable and documented manner that reflects 
organizational and system objectives when invalid inputs are received.  
Supplemental Guidance :  A common vulnerability in organizational systems is unpredictabl e 
behavior when invalid inputs are receive d. This control enhancement ensure s that there is 
predictable behavior in the face of invalid inputs by specifying system responses that facilitate 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 275 transitioning the system to known states without adverse, unintended side effects.  The invalid 
inputs are those inputs related to the information inputs defined by the organization in the 
base control.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(4) INFORMATION INPUT VA LIDATION | REVIEW / TIMING INTERACTIONS  
Account for timing interactions among system components in determining appro priate response s 
for invalid inputs . 
Supplemental Guidance :  In addressing invalid system inputs received across protocol interfaces, 
timing interfaces interactions  become relevant , where one protocol needs to consider the 
impact of the error response on ot her protoc ols within the protocol stack. For example, 802.11 
standard wireless network protoco ls do not interact well with Transmission Control Protocols 
(TCP) when packets are dropped (which could be due to invalid packet input). TCP assumes 
packet losses  are due to congest ion, while packets lost over 802.11 link s are typically dropped 
due to co llisions or noise on the link. If TCP make s a congestion response, it takes  precisely 
the wrong action in response to a collision event. Adversaries may be able to use 
apparently what appears to be  acceptable individual behaviors of the pro tocols in concert to 
achieve adverse effects through suitable construction of invalid input.  
Related Controls :  None.  
(5) INFORMATION INPUT VA LIDATION | RESTRICT INPUTS TO TRUSTED SOURCES AND APPROVED FORM ATS 
Restrict the use of information inputs to [ Assignment: organization- defined trusted sources] and/or 
[Assignment: organization- defined formats ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control enhancement applies the concept of whitelisting to 
information inputs. Specifying known trusted sources for information inputs and acceptable 
formats for such inputs can reduce the probability of malicious activity.  
Related Controls :  AC-3, AC -6. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 167. 
SI-11 ERROR HANDLING  
Control : 
a. Generate error messages that provide information necessary for corrective actions without revealing information that could be exploited; and 
b. Reveal er ror messages only to [ Assignment: organization- defined personnel  or roles ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations consider t he structure  and the content of error messages . The 
extent to which system s can handle error conditions is guided and informed by or ganizational 
policy and operational requirements.  Exploitable information include s, for example, erroneous 
logon attempts with password s entered by mistake as the usernam e; mission /business information 
that can be derived from , if not stated explicitly by , the information recorded;  and 
personal personal ly identifiable  information such as account numbers, social security numbers , and 
credit card numbers . In addition, error messages may provide a covert channe l for transmitting 
information.  
Related Controls :  AU-2, AU-3, SC-31, SI -2. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SI-12 INFORMATION HANDLING MANAGEMENT  AND RETENTION  
Control :  handles Manage  and retain information within the system  and information output from the 
system  in accordance with applicabl e laws, Executive Orders, directives,  regulations, policies, 
standards, guidelines and operational requirements.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 276 Supplemental Guidance :  Information handling management  and retention requirements cover the full 
life cycle of information, in some cases exten ding beyond system disposal . Information to be 
retained may also include policies, procedures, plans, and other types  of administrative 
information. The National Archives and Records Administration provides guidance on records 
retention.  
Related Controls :  All XX-1 Controls,  AC-16, AU -5, AU- 11, CA -2, CA -3, CA -5, CA -6, CA -7, CA -
9, CM -5, CM -9, CP -2, IR -8, MP-2, MP-3, MP-4, MP -6, PA-1, PA -2, PA -3, PL- 2, PL -4, PM -4, 
PM-8, PM -9, PS -2, PS -6, RA -2, RA -3, SA -5. 
Control Enhancements :   
(1) INFORMATION MANAGEMENT AND RET ENTION  | LIMIT PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATIO N ELEMENTS  
Limit personally identifiable information being processed in the information life cycle to the 
[Assignment: organization- defined elements] identified in the privacy risk assessment.  
Supplemental G uidance :  Limiting the use of personally identifiable information throughout  the 
information lif e cycle when such information is not needed for operational purposes helps 
reduce the level of privacy risk created by a system.  The information life cycle incl udes 
information creation, collection, use, processing, storage, maintenance, dissemination, 
disclosure, and disposition.  
Related Controls :  None .  
(2) INFORMATION  MANAGEMENT AND RETEN TION  | MINIMIZE PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMA TION IN 
TESTING , TRAINING , AND RESEARCH  
Use [ Assignment: organization- defined techniques] to minimize the use of personally identifiable 
information  for research, testing, or training, in accordance with the privacy risk assessment.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Organizations ca n minimize t he risk to an individual’s privacy by 
using techniques such as de -identification or synthetic data. Limiting the use of personally 
identifiable information throughout the information lif e cycle when such information is not 
needed for research, testing, or training helps reduce the level of privacy risk created by a 
system.  
Related Controls :  PM-23. 
References :  NIST SP 800-188. 
SI-13 PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION  
Control : 
a. Determine mean time to failure  (MTTF)  for [Assignment: organization- defined system 
components ] in specific environments of operation; and  
b. Provide substitute system components  and a means  to exchange active and standby 
components  at [Assignment: organizati on-defined MTTF substitution criteria ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  While MTTF  is primarily a reliability issue, this control addresses  potential 
failure s of system components that provide security capability. F ailure rates reflect installation -
specific  consideration , not industry- average. Organization s define the criteria for substitut ion of  
system component s based on the MTTF value with consideration for resulting potential harm from 
component failure s. Transfer of responsibilities between active and standby components does not 
compromise safety, operational readiness, or security  capability. This includes, for example, 
preservation of system state variables . Standby component s remain  available at all times except 
for maintenance issues or recovery failure s in progress.  
Related Controls :  CP-2, CP-10, CP -13, MA -2, MA -6, SC -6. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION | TRANSFERRING COMPONENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
Takes system component s out of service by transferring component responsibilities to substit ute 
component s no later than [ Assignment: organization- defined fraction or percentage ] of mean time 
to failure.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 277 Supplemental Guidance :  None.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(2) PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION | TIME LIMIT ON PROCE SS EXECUTION WITHOUT  SUPERVISION  
[Withdrawn: Incorporated into SI -7(16) ]. 
(3) PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION | MANUAL TRANSFER BET WEEN COMPONENTS  
Manually initiate transfer s between active and standby system components when the use of the 
active component reaches [Assignment: organization- defin ed frequency] ifpercentage] of the mean 
time to failure.  
Supplemental Guidance :  For example, if the MTTF for a system component is one hundred  
days and the  organization -defined time period ].percentage is ninety percent , the manu al 
transfer would occur aft er ninety  days. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION | STANDBY COMPONENT I NSTALLATION AND NOTIFICATION  
The organization, if informationIf  system component failures  are detected:  
(a) EnsuresEnsure  that the standby component s are successfully  and transparently installed 
within [ Assignment: organization -defined time -period]; and  
(b) [Selection (one or more): activatesA ctivate [Assignment: organization- defined alarm ]; 
Automatically shut down the system ].; [Assignment: organization -defined action ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Automatic or manual transfer of components from standby to active 
mode can occur , for example,  upon detection of component failure s. 
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) PREDICTABLE FAILURE PREVENTION | FAILOVER CAPABILITY   
Provide  [Selection: real-time; near  real-time] [Assignment : organization- defined failover capability]  
for the system . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Failover refers  to the automatic switchover to an alternate system upon 
the failure of the primary system. F ailover capability include s, for example, incorporating 
mirrored system operations at alternate processing site s or periodic data mirrori ng at regular 
intervals defined by recovery time-periods of organizations . 
Related Controls :  CP-6, CP -7, CP -9. 
References :  None.  
SI-14 NON -PERS ISTENCE  
Control :  Implement non -persistent [ Assignment: organization- defined system components and 
services ] that are initiated in a known state and terminated [ Selection (one or more): upon end of 
session of use; periodically at [Assignment: organization -defined frequency ]]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  This control mitigates risk from advanced persistent threats (APTs) by 
significantly reducing the targeting capability of adversaries (i.e., window of opportunity and 
available attack surface) to initiate and co mplete attacks. By implementing the concept of non -
persistence for selected system components, o rganizations can provide a known state computing 
resource for a specific time -period that does not give adversaries sufficient time on target to 
exploit vulnera bilities in organizational systems and the environments in which those systems 
operate. Since the APT  is a high -end, sophisticated  threat regarding  capability, intent, and 
targeting, organizations assume that  over an extended period , a percentage of attack s will be 
successful. Non -persistent system components and services are activated as required using 
protected information and terminated periodically  or at the end of sessions. Non- persistence 
increases the work factor of adversaries in attempting to compr omise or breach organizational 
systems.  
Non-persistence can be achieved by refreshing  system components, for example, by periodically 
re-imaging components or by using a variety of common virtualization techniques. Non -persistent 
services can be implemented using virtualization techniques as part of virtual machines or as new 
instances of processes on physical machines (either persistent or non -persistent). The benefit of 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 278 periodic refreshes of system components and services is that it does not require organ izations to 
first determine whether compromises of components or services  have occurred (something that 
may often be difficult to determine). The refresh of selected system components and services 
occurs with sufficient frequency to prevent the spread or i ntended impact of attacks, but not with 
such frequency that it makes the system unstab le. In some instances, Refreshes  of critical 
components and services may be done periodically to  hinder the ability of adversaries to exploit 
optimum window s of vulnerabi lities.  
Related Controls :  SC-30, SC -34. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) NON-PERSISTENCE | REFRESH FROM TRUSTE D SOURCES  
Obtain software and data employed during system component and service refreshes from 
[Assignment: organization- defined trusted sources] . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Trusted sources include, for example, software and data from write -
once, read -only media or from selected off -line secure storage facilities.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  None.  
SI-15 INFORMATION OUTPUT FILTERING  
Control :  Validate information output from [ Assignment: organization- defined software programs 
and/or applications ] to ensure that the information is consistent with the expected content.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Certain types of cyber attacks  (e.g.,, including for example,  SQL 
injections ), produce output results that are unexpected or inconsistent with the output results that 
would normally be expected from software programs or applications. This control enhancement 
focuses on detecting extraneous content, preventing such ext raneous content from being displayed, 
and then alerting monitoring tools that anomalous behavior has been discovered.  
Related Controls :  SI-3, SI -4. 
Control Enhancements :  
(1) INFORMATION OUTPUT F ILTERING  | LIMIT PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATIO N DISSEMINATI ON 
Limit the dissemination of personally identifiable information to [ Assignment: organization -defined 
elements] identified in the privacy risk assessment and consistent with authorized purposes.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Preventing the sharing of personally  identifiable information  outside of 
explicitly  determined elements helps mitigate privacy risk s that may arise from using such 
information  to detect anomalous system behavior. Organizations weig h the risks created by 
using personally identifiable informat ion for information output filtering (as either signature 
or heuristic information) against the securit y risks they help mitigate and the established 
privacy posture in the  privacy program plan.  
Related Controls :  PA-2, PA -3, PM-18. 
References :  None.  
SI-16 MEMORY PROTECTION  
Control :  Implement [ Assignment: organization- defined security safeguards ] to protect  the system 
memory from unauthorized code execution.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Some adversaries launch attacks with the intent of executing code in non -
executable regions of memory or in memory locations that are prohibited. Security safeguards employed to protect memory include, for example, data execution prevention and address space 
layout randomization. Data execution prevention safeguards can either be hardware- enforced or 
software -enforced with hardware enforcement providing the greater strength of mechanism.  
Related Controls :  AC-25, SC -3. 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 279 Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None.  
SI-17 FAIL -SAFE PROCEDURES  
 Control :  Implement [ Assignment: or ganization- defined fail- safe procedures ] when [ Assignment: 
organization- defined failure conditions occur ]. 
Supplemental Guidance :  Failure conditions include, for example, loss of communications among 
critical system components or between system components  and operational facilities. Fail -safe 
procedures include, for example, alerting operator personnel and providing specific instructions on 
subsequent steps to take. These steps include, for example, doing nothing, reestablishing system 
settings, shutting d own processes, restarting the system, or contacting designated organizational 
personnel.  
Related Controls :  CP-12, CP -13, SC -24, SI -13. 
Control Enhancements :  None.  
References :  None . 
SI-18 INFORMATION DISPOSAL  
Control :  Use [ Assignment: organization- defin ed techniques or methods ] to dispose of, destroy, or 
erase information . 
Supplemental Guidance :  Disposal or destruction of information applies to originals as well as copies 
and archived records, including system logs that may contain personally identifiab le information . 
Related Controls :  MP -6. 
Control Enhancements :  None . 
References :  None . 
SI-19 DATA QUALITY OPERATIONS  
Control : 
a. Upon collection or creation of personally identifiable information , check for the accuracy, 
relevance, timeliness, impact, compl eteness, and de -identification of that information across 
the information life cycle; and  
b. Check for  and correct as necessary [ Assignment: organization- defined frequency] and across 
the information life cycle:  
1. Inaccurate or outdated personally identifiable information ; 
2. Personally identifiable information  of incorrectly determined impact ; or 
3. Incorrectly de- identified personally identifiable information . 
Supplemental Guidance :  The information life cycle includes information creation, collection, use, 
processi ng, storage, maintenance, dissemination, disclosure, disposition.  
Related Controls :  PM-25, SI-4, SI -20. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DATA QUALITY OPERATI ONS  | UPDATING AND CORRECT ING PERSONALLY IDENT IFIABLE INFORMATION   
Employ technical controls to correct  perso nally identifiable information  used in organizational 
programs and systems that is  inaccurate or outdated, incorrectly determined regarding  impact, or 
incorrectly de- identified.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Use of controls to improve data quality may inadvertently create 
privacy risks. Automated controls may connect to external  or otherwise unrelated systems, 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 280 and the matching of records between these systems may create linkages with unintended 
consequences. Organizations assess and document these risks in their privacy impact 
assessment and make determinations that are in alignment with their privacy program plan.  
Related Controls :  PM-18, RA-8. 
(2) DATA QUALITY OPERATI ONS  | DATA TAGS  
Employ  data tags to automate tracking of personally identifiable information across the 
information life  cycle within organizational systems.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Data tags that contain information about retention dates, usage or 
disclosure policies , or other information pertaining to the management of personally 
identifiable informa tion can support the use of automation tools to enforce relevant data 
management policies.   
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) DATA QUALITY OPERATI ONS  | PERSONALLY IDENTIFIABLE INFORMATION  COLLECTION   
Collect personally identifiable information directly from the in dividual.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Organizations take reasonable steps to confirm the accuracy and 
relevance of personally identifiable information . These  steps may include, for example, 
editing and validating addresses as they are collected or entered into  systems using automated 
address verification look -up application programming interfaces. The types of measures taken 
to protect data quality are based on the nature and context of the personally identifiable 
information , how it is to be used, and how it w as obtained. Measures taken to validate the 
accuracy of personally identifiable information  used to make determinations about the rights, 
benefits, or privileges of individuals under federal programs may be more comprehensive than 
those used to validate le ss sensitive personally identifiable information . Additional steps may 
be necessary to validate personally identifiable information  that is obtained from sources 
other than individuals or the authorized representatives of individuals.  
Related Controls :  None. 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 188. 
SI-20 DE-IDENTIFICATION  
Control :  Remove personally identif iable information  from datasets.  
Supplemental Guidance :  Man y datasets contain information about individuals that can be used to 
distinguish or trace an individual’s identity, such as name, social security number, date and place 
of birth, mother’s maiden name, or biometric records. Datasets may also contain other i nformation 
that is linked or linkable to an individual, such as medical, educational, financial, and employme nt 
information. P ersonally identifiable information is removed from datasets by trained individuals 
when such information  is not (or no longer) nec essary to satisfy the requirements envisioned for 
the data. For examp le, if the dataset is only used to produce  aggregate statistics, the identifiers that 
are not needed for producing those statist ics are removed. Removing identifiers improves privacy 
protection, since information that is removed cannot be inadvertent ly disclosed or improperly 
used. 
Related Controls :  PM-23, PM -24, PM-25, SI-18, SI -19. 
Control Enhancements : 
(1) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | COLLECTION  
De-identify the dataset upon collection by not collec ting personally identifiable information.  
Supplemental Guidance:   If a data source contains personally identifiable information  but the 
information  will not be used, the dataset can be de- identified upon creation by simply not 
collecting the data elements containing the  personally identifiable information. For example, 
if an organization does not intend to use the social security number  of an applicant , then 
application forms do not a sk for a social security number . 
Related Controls :  None . 
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 281 (2) DE-IDENTIFICATIO N | ARCHIVING  
Refrain from archiving personally identifiable information elements  if those elements in a dataset 
will not be needed after the dataset is archived.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Datasets can be archived for many reasons. The envisioned purposes 
for the archived dataset are specified and if personally identifiable information  elements are 
not required, the elements are not archived. For example, social security numbers may have 
been collected for record linkage, but the archived dataset may include the required elements 
from the linked records. In this case, it is not necessary to archive the social security numbers.   
Related Controls :  None . 
(3) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | RELEASE  
Remove  personally identifiable information elements  from a dataset prior to its release if those 
elements in the dataset do not need to be part of the  data release.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Prior to releasing a dataset, a data custodian consider s the intended 
uses of the released dataset and determines if it is necessary to release personally identifiable 
information. If it is not necessary, the personally  identifiable information  can be removed 
using de -identification techniques.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(4) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | REMOVAL , MASKING , ENCRYPTION , HASHING , OR REPLACEMENT OF D IRECT 
IDENTIFIERS  
Remove, mask, encrypt, hash, or replace direct identifiers in a dataset.  
Supplemental Guidance:   There are many possible processes for removing direct identifiers from 
a dataset. Columns in a dataset that contain a direct identifier can be r emoved. In masking, the 
direct identifier is transformed into a repeating character, for exam ple, XXXXXX or 999999.  
Identifiers can be encrypted or hashed, so that the linked records remain linked.  In the case of 
encryption or hashing, algorithms are empl oyed that require the use of a key, including, for 
example,  the Advanced Encryption Standard  or a Hash -based Message Authentication Code. 
Implementations may use the same key for all identifiers or a different key for each identifier . 
Using  a different key for each identifier provides for a higher degree of security  and privacy. 
Identifiers can alternatively be replaced with a keyword, including for example,  transforming 
“George Washington” to “PATIENT,” or replaced with a realistic surrogate value, includi ng 
for example, transforming “George Washington” to “Abraham Polk.”  
Related Controls :  None . 
(5) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | STATISTICAL DISCLOSU RE CONTROL   
Manipulate numerical data, contingency tables, and statistical findings so that no person or 
organization is identifiable in the results of the analysis.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Many types of statistical analyses  can result in the disclosure of 
information about individuals even if only summary information is provided. For example, if 
a school publishes a monthly table with the number of minority students, and in January the 
school reports that it has 10 -19 such students, but in March it reports that it has 20 -29 such 
students, then it can be inferred that the student who enrolled in February was a minority.  
Related Controls :  None . 
(6) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | DIFFERENTIAL PRIVACY  
Prevent  disclosure of personally identifiable information  by adding non- deterministic noise to the 
results of mathematical operations before the results are reported.  
Supplemental Guidance:   The mathematical definition for differential privacy holds that the 
result of a dataset analysis should be approximately  the same before and after the addition or 
removal of a single data record  (which is assumed  to be the data from a single individual ). In 
its most basic form, differential privacy applies only to online query systems . However,  it can 
also be used to produce machine -learning statistical classifiers and synthetic data. Differential 
privacy comes at the cost of decreased accuracy  of results , forci ng organizations to quantify 
the trade -off between privacy protection and the overall accuracy, usefulness , and utility of 
the de -identified dataset.  Non-deterministic noise can include, for example, adding small 
random values to the results of mathematical operations in dataset analysis.  
CHAPTER THREE    PAGE 282 Related Controls :  None . 
(7) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | VALIDATED SOFTWARE  
Perform de -identification using validated algorithms and software that is validated to implement 
the algorithms.  
Supplemental Guidance:   Algorithms that appe ar to remove personally identifiable information  
from a dataset may in fact leave information that is personally identifiable or data that are re-
identifiable. Software that is claimed to implement a validated algorithm may contain bugs or 
may implement a different algorithm. Software may de- identify one type of data , for example, 
integers , but not another type of data , for example, floating point numbers. For these reasons, 
de-identification is performed using algorithms and software that are validated.   
Related Controls :  None . 
(8) DE-IDENTIFICATION  | MOTIVATED INTRUDER  
Perform a motivated intruder test on the de -identified dataset to determine  if the identified data 
remains or if the de -identified data can be re- identified.  
Supplemental Guidance:   A motivate d intruder test is  a test in which a person or group takes a 
data release and specified resources and attempts to re- identify one or more individuals in the  
de-identified dataset. Such tests specify  the amount of inside knowledge, financial resources, 
comp utational resources,  data, and skills that intruder s have at their disposal to conduct the 
tests. A motivated intruder test can identify if de -identification is insufficient. It can also be a 
useful diagnostic tool to assess if de -identification is likely to be sufficient ; however,  the test 
alone cannot prove that de -identification is sufficient.  
Related Controls :  None . 
References :  NIST Special Publication 800- 188.