1 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
 
 
 
First  Bank  Vendor  Management  Policy  
 
Policy  and Program Management  
 
The Board of Directors and management recognize the need to establish and implement policies and 
procedures  with respect  to the appropriate  oversight  of third -party  entities  who provide  various  support 
and/or product services for First Bank. For purposes of this policy, a third -party relationship is a broadly 
defined term to include any entity that has entered into a business arrangement with First Bank by 
contract or otherwise.  
 
The third -party relationship may be positioned directly or indirectly between First Bank and its customers 
or otherwise  have  unfettered  access  to First Bank  customers.  Consequently,  the quality  of that third  party’s 
performance is critical to First Bank’s long -term success.  
 
Mission  
 
The purpose  of the vendor  management  program  is to assist  the Board  of Directors  and Management.  The 
use of third parties can assist First Bank in attaining strategic objectives by increasing revenues or 
reducing  costs.  The use of a third  party  also commonly  serves  as a vehicle  for First Bank  to access  greater 
expertise or efficiency for a particular activity. The decision about whether to use a third party is 
considered by  the Board of  Directors or management  by taking into  account the circumstances unique to 
the potential  relationship.  The use of third  parties  in no way diminishes  the responsibility  of the Board  of 
Directors  and management  to ensure  that the third -party  activity  is conducted  in a safe and sound  manner 
and in compliance with applicable laws, regulations, and internal policies.  
 
The time and  resources  devoted  to managing third  party  relationships  is based on  the risk  the relationship 
presents to First Bank.  
 
Authority  & Responsibility  
 
The Board of Directors and management are ultimately responsible for identifying, controlling and 
properly  overseeing  outsourced  relationships  to mitigate  risk against  First Bank.  The Compliance  Officer 
is responsible for maintaining the program, assisting with new vendor contracts, ensuring that annual 
vendor  reviews  are conducted,  and that risk ratings  are kept up to date as part of the review  process.  The 
Board  of Directors  and management  have  developed  and implemented  this policy  to consistently  govern 
the outsourcing process for the entire organization. This policy addresses outsourced relationships from 
an end -to-end perspective including:  
 
1. Establishing  servicing  requirements  and strategies  
 
2. Selecting  a provider  by conducting  due diligence  activities  
 
3. Negotiating  the contract  to provide  First Bank  with the ability  to control  and monitor  third  party 
activities (e.g., growth restrictions, underwriting guidelines, external audits, etc.) and costs.  

2 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
 4. Monitoring,  changing,  and discontinuing  the outsourced  relationship  if it does not meet  high quality 
standards or uphold contractual terms.  
 
5. Conducting annual  reviews  of high risk or critical  third -party's  audit  results,  financials  and 
vendor  provided documentation.  
6. Reporting any exceptions to the Board of Directors to ensure exceptions are immediately 
addressed to evaluate the risk to First Bank.  
 
Board  of Directors  
 
Appropriate  reporting  through  Board  committees  or the entire  Board  of Directors  shall  address  risk 
management considerations and the overall operation of vendor management activities.  
 
Authority  
This policy  is a general  statement  of First Bank’s  objectives,  direction  and expectations  regarding  the 
oversight  of third -party  vendors  providing  support  for First Bank’s  products,  services  and other  such 
activities. As such, it is the authority, basis and platform for the development, communication, 
implementation, interpretation and enforcement of appropriate and applicable operating standards.  
 
Enforcement  
No part of this policy or its supporting operating procedures should be interpreted as contravening or 
superseding any other legal and regulatory requirements placed upon First Bank. Protective measures 
should  not impede  other  legally  mandated  processes  such as records  retention  or subpoenas.  Any conflicts 
should be submitted immediately to management for further evaluation and/or subsequent submission to 
First Bank’s legal counsel.  
 
Exceptions  
Requests  for exceptions  to this policy  must  be very specific  and may only be granted  on specific  items, 
rather  than to entire  sections.  First Bank  personnel  with exceptions  are to communicate  their requests  to 
management who may need to seek Board of Director approval prior to approving or granting the 
exception.  
 
Planning/Risk  Management  
 
It is the policy of First Bank to appropriately assess, measure, monitor, and control the risks associated 
with the use of third -party relationships in any capacity. While engaging another entity may assist the 
Board of Directors and management in achievin g strategic goals, First Bank realizes that such an 
arrangement reduces management's direct control. Therefore, the use of a third party increases the need 
for oversight  of the process  by First Bank  from  start to finish  by utilizing  the following  main  elem ents of 
an effective third -party risk management process:  
 
1. Risk assessment,  
2. Due diligence  in selecting  a third  party,  
3. Contract  structuring,  
4. Legal  review,  
5. Ongoing  oversight,  and 
6. Vendor  Termination  
3 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
While these elements apply to any third -party activity, the precise use of this process is dependent upon 
the nature  of the third -party  relationship,  the scope  and magnitude  of the activity,  and the risks  identified. 
These  guidelines  are not intended  to result  in an expansion  or a decrease  in the use of third  parties  by First 
Bank, but to provide a framework for assessing, measuring, monitoring, and controlling risks associated 
with third parties throughout the relationship life cycle.  
 
First Bank’s  comprehensive  risk management  process,  which  includes  management  of all third -party 
relationships and all third -party relationships attained through acquisition, enables First Bank to ensure 
that capital is sufficient to support First Bank’s underlying risk exposures and that the third party is 
operating in a manner consistent  with federal and state laws, rules, and regulations, including those 
intended to protect consumers.  
 
In certain  instances,  a third -party  relationship  may be classified  by First Bank  as “high  risk”  if the: 
 
1. Relationship  has a material  or critical  effect  on First Bank  revenues  or expenses;  
2. Third  party performs critical  functions;  
3. Third  party  stores,  accesses,  transmits  or performs  transactions  regarding  confidential 
customer/member or employee information; or  
4. Third  party  poses  risks  that could  significantly  affect  earnings  or capital  
 
Third  party  relationships  that fall into the high risk or critical  category  require  the highest  level  of due 
diligence, legal review and ongoing oversight.  
 
Program  Management utilizing  Vendor  Management  Software  
First Bank Board of Directors and management recognize the resource intensive nature of vendor 
management,  especially  as it relates  to managing  the risks  involved  with outsourced  service  providers. 
Considering this, management chose to partner with  a software vendor  that provides First Bank with 
critical vendor management support including:  
 
1. Centralization  of all vendor  information  
2. Vendor  and service  risk assessment  
3. Vendor  and associated  service performance  monitoring  
4. Vendor  relationship  portals  for easier  vendor  management  
5. Automation  of due diligence  and request  for proposal  (RFP)  process  
6. Incident  reporting  and management  
7. Centralized  contracts and document  storage  
8. Third  party  vendor  due diligence  services  and ongoing  monitoring  support  
 
The software  assists  First Bank  with documenting  the significance  of the vendor  relationship  by allowing 
relationship managers the ability to assess the risk of the products and/or services provided in order to 
derive one of these three vendor relationship types:  
 
1. Critical  – extreme  liabilities  result  if the information  is compromised,  could  cause  major  financial 
loss, result in legal action against the institution, or severely damage the institution’s reputation. 
Appropriate vendor oversight is required and due diligence must be conducted annually.  
 
2. Material  – serious  liabilities  result  if the information  is compromised,  could  cause  moderate  financial 
loss, legal action against the institution would be likely, or damage to the institution’s reputation  
4 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
would  be moderate.  Appropriate  vendor  oversight  is necessary  and due diligence  will be conducted 
every two years.  
 
3. Minor  – Liabilities  could  possibly  result  if the information  is compromised,  would  likely  cause  only 
minor financial loss,  litigation unlikely or damage to  the institution’s reputation would be minimal. 
Due diligence should be conducted on an as needed basis.  
 
Overall  Vendor  Risk Rating  
It is the policy of First Bank to review service provider relationships on an ongoing basis, with the 
frequency and level of detail determined according to the risk categories mentioned above.  The overall 
risk rating is determined by the relationship manager’s initial due diligence and the results of the 
completed vendor software risk rating review. This process takes into consideration the relationship 
significance,  due diligence  collected,  recent  performance  assessments  and any incidents  reported.  Overall 
vendor risk ratings include:  
 
High  
The risk associated  with the vendor/service  relationship  could  be significant,  either  due to the service  or 
the vendor providing the service.  
 
Medium  
There  is measurable  risk associated  with the vendor/service  relationship,  either  due to nature  of the 
service or the vendor providing the service.  
 
Low 
There is little risk associated with the vendor/service relationship. Impact is minimal and could be 
considered  a cost of doing  business.  Additional  controls  could  further  reduce  the impact  and might  be 
considered as part of an optimization process. Appropriate vendor oversight is minimal.  
 
Product  and Service  Risk Categories  
First Bank realizes that there are numerous risks that may arise from the use of a third party that can 
contribute  to operational  and transaction  risks  in each process  involved  in the delivery  of First Bank’s 
products or services.  
 
Not all of the following risks will be applicable to the products or services provided to First Bank. 
However, complex or significant arrangements may have definable risks in most areas. It is the 
responsibility  of the Board  of Directors  and management  to understand  the nature  of these  risks  in the 
context of First Bank’s current or planned use of its third party’s products and services.  
 
Compliance  Risk 
Compliance Risk is the current and prospective risk to earnings or capital arising from violations of, or 
non-conformance with laws, rules, regulations, prescribed practices, internal policies and procedures, or 
ethical standards. Compliance Risk also arises in situations where the laws or rules governing cert ain 
financial institution products or activities of the financial institution’s customers may be ambiguous or 
untested. This risk exposes the financial institution to fines, civil money penalties, payment of damages, 
and the voiding  of contracts.  Complianc e Risk can lead to diminished  reputation,  reduced  franchise  value, 
limited business opportunities, reduced expansion potential, and an inability to enforce contracts.  
 
Credit  Risk 
5 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
Credit Risk is the current and prospective risk to earnings or capital arising from an obligator’s  failure to 
meet  the terms  of any contract  with the financial  institution  or otherwise  to perform  as agreed.  Credit  Risk 
is found in all activities in which success depends on counterparty, issuer or borrower performance. It 
arises any time financial institution funds are extended, committed, invested or otherwise exposed 
through actual or implied contractual agreements , whether reflected on or off the balance sheet.  
 
Interest  Rate Risk 
Interest Rate Risk is the current and prospective risk to earnings or capital arising from movements in 
interest  rates.  Interest  Rate Risk arises  from  differences  between  the timing  of rate changes  and the timing 
of cash flows (repricing risk), from changing rate relationships among different yield curves affecting 
financial institution activities (basis risk), from changing rate relationships across the spectrum of 
maturities (yield curve risk), and from in terest related options embedded in financial institution products 
(options r isk). 
 
Liquidity  Risk 
Liquidity Risk is the current and prospective risk to earnings or capital arising from a financial 
institution’s  inability  to meet  its obligations  when  they come  due without  incurring  unacceptable  losses. 
Liquidity Risk includes the inability to manage unplanned decreases or changes in funding sources.  
Liquidity  Risk also arises  from  the failure  to recognize  or address  changes  in market  conditions  that affect 
the ability to liquidate assets quickly with minimal loss in value.  
 
Reputation  Risk 
Reputation  Risk is the current  and prospective  impact  on earnings  and capital  arising  from  negative  public 
opinion. This affects the institution’s ability to establish new relationships or services or continue 
servicing existing relationships. This risk may expose the financial institution to  litigation, financial loss, 
or a decline in its customer base. Reputation Risk exposure is present throughout the organization and 
includes the responsibility to exercise an abundance of caution in dealing with its cus tomers and the 
community.  
 
Strategic  Risk 
Strategic  Risk is the current  and prospective  impact  on earnings  or capital  arising  from  adverse  business 
decisions,  improper  implementation  of business  decisions,  or lack of responsiveness  to industry  changes. 
This risk is a function of the compatibility of an organization’s strategic goals, the business strategies 
developed to achieve those goals, the resources deployed against these goals and the quality of 
implementation. The resources needed to carr y out business strategies are both tangible and intangible. 
They  include  communication  channels,  operating  systems,  delivery  networks,  and managerial  capacities 
and capabilities. The organization’s internal characteristics must b e evaluated against the impact of 
economic, technological, competitive, regulatory, and other environmental changes.  
 
Transaction  Risk 
Transaction  Risk is the current  and prospective  risk to earnings  and capital  arising  from  fraud,  error,  and 
the inability to deliver products or services, maintain a competitive position, and manage information. 
Transaction Risk is inherent in efforts to gain strategic advantage, and in the failure to keep pace with 
changes in the financial services marketplace. Tra nsaction Risk is evident in each product and service 
offered. Transaction Risk encompasses product development and delivery, transaction processing, 
systems  development,  computing  systems,  complexity  of products  and services and  the internal  control 
enviro nment.  
6 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
 
 
 
Service  Provider  Due Diligence  
 
General  
 
The Board  of Directors  and Management  recognize  the need  to incorporate  a complete  and extensive  due 
diligence process before a contract is awarded and as a condition of continuing support for any of First 
Bank’s  significant  vendors  (i.e., subcontractors,  support  vendors,  and other  parties).  Ultimately,  the depth 
of due diligence will vary depending on the scope and importance of the outsourced services in addition 
to the risk to First Bank from these services.  
 
Due Diligence  Standards  
 
It is the responsibility of the Board of Directors or management to select a qualified entity to implement 
the activity  or program  following  an assessment  of risks  and a decision  to proceed  with a plan to establish 
a third -party relationship in response to a request for proposal (RFP) or contract. The due diligence 
process  provides  First Bank  with the information  needed  to address  qualitative  and quantitative  aspects  of 
potential third parties to determine if a relationship would help achieve First Bank 's strategic and 
financial  goals  and mitigate  identified  risks.  Not only is due diligence  to be performed  prior  to selecting  a 
third party, but it is also to be performed periodically during the cours e of the relationship, particularly 
when considering the renewal of a contract.  
 
The scope  and depth  of due diligence  is directly  related  to the importance  and magnitude  of First Bank’s 
relationship with the third party. For example, large scale, highly visible programs or programs dealing 
with sensitive  data integral  to First Bank  's success  warrant  an in-depth  due diligence  of the potential  third 
party, while the due diligence process for isolated low risk third party activities would be much less 
comprehensive.  
 
Entities  with whom  we do business  must  adhere  to the following  principles,  which  are addressed  in our 
vendor questionnaire:  
 
• We explicitly  prohibit  human  trafficking  and the use of involuntary  labor  within  our supply 
base including  forced,  bonded,  or indentured  labor,  involuntary  or exploitative  prison  labor, 
and other forms of modern slavery.  Vendors must pay their employees and contractors 
appropriate wages.  
• Vendors  must  not employ  child  labor.  
• First Bank  recognizes  its responsibility  to protect  human  rights.  Examples  of such rights  are 
articulated in internationally recognized standards, including the United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights (UNGPs), the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, and the International Labor Organization (ILO) Core Conventions.  
• Vendors  are required  to comply  with all applicable  laws regarding  discrimination  in hiring 
and employment practices. Vendors are expected to maintain a workplace free of 
discrimination, harassment, victimization, intolerance of any other form of inappropriate 
behavior or abuse on any grounds, including but not limited to age, disability, ethnic or 
social origin, gender, gender identity, nationality, race, sexual orientatio n, marital status, 
parental status, pregnancy, political convictions, religious beliefs, union affiliation, or  
7 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
 veteran  status.  Vendors  are expected  to maintain  an environment  free of harassment, 
violence, and abuse (physical or verbal) at all times.  
• Vendors  must  provide  a safe and healthy  working  environment  that minimizes  health  and 
safety risks and supports accident prevention and ensures the health and safety of all 
personnel and all others affected by their activities.  Vendor’s workers must be provided 
with ready access to clean toilet facilities and potable water.  Vendors must ensure that 
workers do not work excessive hours which jeopardizes their health and safety.  
• Vendors and their subcontractors are expected to engage and provide opportunities for a 
workforce that is inclusive of diverse groups. Vendors are expected to take proactive steps 
to include  the hiring  of historically  underrepresented  groups,  such examples  are of workers 
who self-identify  as minorities,  ethnically  diverse,  women,  LGBTQ+,  Veteran,  or a person 
with a disability.  
• Vendors should identify and manage risks and opportunities related to climate change. 
Where appropriate to the size and nature of their operations, vendors should address the 
environmental  impacts  from  its operations  including  raw material  usage,  greenhouse  gas 
emissions, water, waste, air quality and biodiversity.  Any waste, and in particular 
hazardous waste, must be managed in a responsible manner.  
 
Comprehensive due diligence involves a review of all available information about  a potential third party, 
focusing on the entity's financial condition, its specific relevant experience, its knowledge of applicable 
laws and regulations,  its social  and environmental  practices,  its reputation,  and the scope  and effectiveness 
of its operations and controls. The evaluation of a third party may include the following items:  
 
• Audited  financial  statements, annual  reports, SEC  filings  and other  available  financial  indicators.  
• Inspecting  as far back  in the supply  chain  as needed  to obtain  assurances  that the entire  supply 
chain is free from unethical social and environmental conditions and to ensure that component and  
material  substitutions  are aligned  with agreed -upon  materials.  This is on a global  scale.  
• Significance  of the proposed contract on  the third  party’s  financial  condition.  
• Experience  and ability  in implementing  and monitoring  the proposed activity.  
• Business  reputation, including  existence  and corporate  history.  
• Qualifications,  backgrounds,  and reputations  of company  principals,  including  criminal  background 
checks when appropriate.  
• Strategies  and goals,  including  service  philosophies,  quality  initiatives,  efficiency  improvements,  and 
employment policies.  
• Legal  and regulatory  compliance,  including  the existence  of any significant  complaints  or litigation, 
or regulatory actions against the company.  
• Ability  to perform  the proposed  functions  using  current  systems  or the need  to make  additional 
investment.  
• Reliance  on and success  in dealing  with the use of other  third  parties  or subcontractors  by the third 
party.  
• Scope  of internal  controls,  systems  and data security,  privacy  protections,  and audit  coverage.  
8 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
• Business  resumption strategy  and contingency  plans.  
• Knowledge  of relevant  consumer  protection  and civil rights  laws and  regulations.  
• Adequacy  of management  information  systems.  
• Insurance  coverage.  
• Other  companies  using  similar  services  from  the provider  that may be contacted  for reference.  
• Service  delivery  capability,  status, and  effectiveness.  
• Technology  and systems  architecture.  
 
The depth  and formality  of the due diligence  performed  by Management  may vary according  to the risk of 
the outsourced relationship, First Bank’s familiarity with the prospective service providers, and the stage 
of the provider selection process.  
 
Contracts  
 
Each purchase or service order is based upon an individual situation, and the selection of an appropriate 
vendor  is to be selected  on the basis  of quality,  service  and price  in addition  to the  due diligence  directives  
of this  policy.  Price  should  not be the driving  force  in this decision -making  process.  Some  degree  of loyalty 
to a vendor may generate a more immediate response when a need of First Bank becomes a priority.  
 
Contract  Considerations  
It is the responsibility  of the Board  of Directors  and Management  to ensure  that the specific  expectations 
and obligations  of both First Bank and the  third party  are outlined  in a written contract prior to  entering 
into the arrangement after selecting a third party. The Board of Directors will be informed by 
Management prior to entering into any critical or material third party arrangements. Appropriate legal 
counsel is also to review significant contracts p rior to finalization.  
 
It is the responsibility  of Management  to ensure  that a critical  or material  risk contract,  at a minimum:  
 
1. Portrays  an accurate  description  of the outsourcing relationship.  
 
2. Is clearly  written  and contains  sufficient  detail  to comprehensively  define  the rights  and 
responsibilities of each party.  
 
3. Is reviewed  by First Bank  counsel,  when  appropriate.  
 
The following  is a list of key contract  elements  that every  vendor  owner  should  consider  including  in new 
agreements during the contract negotiation process or existing agreements during the contract renewal 
review process. The inclusion of various elements listed will depend on the type of service provided and 
risk rating of the vendor.  
 
1. Nature  and Scope  of Arrangement  
2. Performance  Measures  or Benchmarks  
3. Responsibilities  for Providing,  Receiving,  and Retaining  Information  
4. The Right  of the Company  to Audit  and Require  Remediation  
5. Responsibility  to Comply  with Applicable  Laws  and Regulation  
6. Cost and Compensation  
7. Ownership  and License  
8. Confidentiality and  Integrity  
9. Business  Resumption and  Contingency Plans  
9 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
10. Indemnification  
11. Insurance  
12. Dispute  Resolution  
13. Limits  on Liability  
14. Default  and Termination  
15. Customer  Complaints  
16. Subcontracting  
17. Foreign -Based  Third Parties  
18. Legal  Review  
19. Regulatory  Supervision  
20. Cybersecurity  
 
Ongoing  Monitoring  
 
It is the policy of First Bank to maintain adequate oversight of third -party  activities and adequate quality 
control over those products and services provided through third party arrangements in order to minimize 
exposure to potential significant financial loss, reputation damage and supervisory action. For vendors 
that interact  with customers  directly,  it’s a policy  of the Bank  to monitor  consumer  complaints  concerning 
products or services provided through the vendors. Because the regulators regard the actions of the 
vendors as those of the Bank, and as the monitoring of consumer complaints can  reveal trends or causes 
indicating a violation of UDAAP requirements, we include ongoing monitoring of consumer complaints 
as part of its vendor management program. At a minimum, such monitoring should address the  
following:  
 
a. Specific  requirements for monitoring  (i.e., reports and  frequency)  
b. Identification  of products  or services  in complaints  
c. Timing  (i.e., when  the complaint  is received  and resolved)  
 
First Bank’s oversight program generally includes monitoring of the third party’s quality of service, risk 
management  practices,  financial  condition,  and applicable  controls  and reports.  First Bank  utilizes  vendor 
management software and professional services to manage the ongoing monitoring process of each 
vendor and third -party service provider.  
 
Results  of oversight  activities  for material  third  party  arrangements  are periodically  reported  to the Board 
of Directors. Identified weaknesses are documented and promptly addressed.  
 
Proper  documentation  facilitates  the monitoring  and management  of the risks  associated  with third  party 
relationships.  Therefore,  it is the policy  of First Bank  to maintain  documents  and records  on all aspects  of 
the third -party  relationship,  including  valid  contracts,  business  plans,  risk analysis,  due diligence,  dispute 
resolution and oversight activities (including reports to the Board of Directors and management). This 
critical documentation and reporting functionality is housed and maintained in the software.  
Vendor  Termination  
Any vendor  not in compliance  with First Bank’s  Vendor  Management  Program  will be required  to make 
the necessary enhancements to correct noted deficiencies and assure compliance within an acceptable 
timeframe.  Any weakness  that a vendor  is unwilling  or unable  to correct  to the Bank’s  satisfaction  will be 
addressed with the Compliance Officer. Management will determine whether the weakness presents an 
unacceptable  risk to the institution  and forward  any findings  to the Board  of Directors  for final approval.  
10 Approved by Board Compliance Committee August 10, 2023  
Approved by the Board of Directors August 15, 2023   
  
In instances  when  a solution  that controls/mitigates  the weaknesses  found  cannot  be reached,  alternative 
vendors will be sought.